Brougham Castle

Brougham Castle
Description: 	A Roman fort originally occupied the site of the current Brougham Castle.
The current Brougham Castle, pronounced 'Broom', was founded by Hugh de Morville sometime between 1157 and 1173 even though the first written record is dated 1228 following the death of Robert de Vipont into whose possession the castle had passed in 1203.
She died at Brougham Castle, in the room where her father had been born, in 1676.
Notes: 	Brougham Castle, an English Heritage site, is open daily from 10am to 6pm (April to Sept), 10am to 5pm (Oct).
Brougham Castle, Nr Penrith, Cumbria
Built by Robert de Vieuxpont in the early 13th century on the site of an earlier Roman fort, the castle sits on the banks of the River Eamont.
With the outbreak of the Anglo-Scottish Wars in 1296, Brougham became an important military base and the castles wooden defences were replaced with stone walls and a large stone gatehouse added.
Ruins of an early 13th century castle.
Ruins of an early 13th century castle.
Building started around 1214 by Robert de Vieuxpont.
Through the marriage of Robert de Vieuxpont's great grand-daughter to Roger Clifford the castle changed hands and stayed in the Clifford family for 4 centuries.
Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle at 5.00am on midsummer morning.
A Roman fort originally occupied the site of the current Brougham Castle.
Skipton, Pendragon, Appleby, Brough and Brougham Castles were restored to their former glory.
She died at Brougham Castle, in the room where her father had been born, in 1676.
Brougham Castle, The Roman Fort Brocavum, and the A66.
Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle
In about 1214, Robert de Vieuxpont, one of King Johns most important agents of the north of England acquired the site on which Brougham castle was later built, in order to defend against his royal master’s northern enemies and their Scottish allies.
By then the castle was in the hands of Robert Clifford, whose father Roger had become lord of Brougham when he married Robert de Vieuxpont’s great-granddaughter in 1268.
It was built around an earlier 13th century keep by Robert de Vieuxpont.
During the 15th century, Brougham Castle played an important role in the War of the Roses, with the Lancastrian Cliffords and Yorkist Nevilles competing for dominance in the Penrith area.
Brougham Castle by JMW Turner, c.1824
On her death in 1676, Brougham Castle passed to her grandson, the 6th Earl of Thanet.
He preferred to live at Appleby Castle and so dismantled Brougham Castle, selling off its fixtures and fittings including the lead roof.
The Countess Pillar, situated east of Brougham Castle on the south side of the A66, was erected by Lady Anne around 1654 to commemorate her last parting from her dearly-loved mother on this spot on 2 April 1616.
Brougham Roman fort (Brocavum) and civil settlement and Brougham Castle
Name: Brougham Roman fort (Brocavum) and civil settlement and Brougham Castle
Brougham Roman fort (Brocavum) and civil settlement and Brougham Castle is scheduled for the following principal reasons:
Border warfare continued during the C12 and in 1203 King John (1167-1216) granted the lordship of Westmorland to Robert de Vieuxpont (died 1228) and early in his lordship documentary evidence suggests a well-established community existed at Brougham by this time.
It fell to Robert’s grandson, Roger Clifford (1333-89), to restore Brougham Castle back to an effective border defence.
After Roger’s death peace gradually came to the border region and despite Brougham Castle being kept in commission little additional building work was undertaken until the arrival of Lady Anne Clifford (1590-1676) after the Civil War (1642-51).
After Lady Anne’s death Brougham Castle came to the Earls of Thanet and the castle gradually fell into irreparable ruin with usable material being sold off in 1714.
The monument includes the earthwork and buried remains of Brougham Roman fort, the buried remains of the fort's associated vicus or civil settlement lying to the south and south-east of the fort, and the upstanding and buried remains of Brougham Castle.
Brougham Castle is of stone construction and together with its southern defences it overlies the very northern part of the Roman fort.
This includes the upstanding and buried remains of Brougham Roman fort and two separate parts of its associated vicus, together with the upstanding and buried remains of Brougham Castle.
Summerson, H., Brougham Castle, Brougham, (1998)
Williams, J., 'Transactions of the Cumberland & Westmorland Antiquarian & Archaeological Society' in Excavations at Brougham Castle, 1987, , Vol.
Zant, John M, 'Transactions of the Cumberland & Westmorland Antiquarian & Archaeological Society' in An Excavation at Brougham Castle, , Vol.
The Roman Fort andd Later Earthworks at Brougham Castle.
Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle
In what must be one of the most attractive settings for a castle in all of England, Brougham Castle rests on a low rise beside the River Eamont, a few miles east of Penrith.
Brougham dates to the early 13th century but the site was used much earlier by the Romans.
Brougham Castle Photo Gallery
About Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle Photos
Brougham Castle, Cumbria…
Brougham Castle was began by Robert de Vieuxpont in the early 13th Century.
In 1264 the grandson of Robert de Vieuxpont, also called Robert, was decleared a traitor and Brougham Castle, along with the de Vieuxponts family’s other castles and estates were confiscated by the Crown.The estates and castles were eventually returned to the de Vieuxpont family.
It was against this backdrop the defences at Brougham Castle were improved, with the wooden defences being replaced in stone and a new gatehouse being added.
Such was the importance of Robert de Clifford and Brougham Castle as his caput, Edward I visited him at Brougham in 1300.
After this, Brougham Castle seems to have lost its status as the main administrative centre for the de Cliffords, with them preferring to spend their time at Skipton Castle in Yorkshire.
By 1592 Brougham Castle was in a state of disrepair.
Brougham Castle was inherited in 1643 by Lady Anne Clifford, who was the last member of the Clifford family to live at the castle.
Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle near Penrith
Brougham Castle near Penrith
Brougham Castle is situated some 2 miles from the market town of Penrith and is a fascinating place to visit and explore.
The castle was founded in the early 13th century on the site of a Roman fort and sits near the rivers Eamont and Lowther.
The Norman family of Robert de Vieuxpont built the Brougham castle, the ruins of which can still be seen today.
Brougham Castle In 1268
Brougham castle descended over several generations of the Clifford family, however in 1592 the castle was in a state of disrepair.
Brougham Castle and Lady Anne Clifford
Should you wish to see better quality photographs of Brougham Castle please visit Brougham Castle on our Lake District Walks Flickr account.
For me Brougham Castle is one of my favorites and I hope you enjoy visiting it as much as I did.
Castles of England - Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle near Penrith.
Brougham Castle is located about two miles south east of Penrith, Cumbria on the site of an old Roman fort overlooking the River Eamont.
Brougham Castle was built in the early 13th century by Robert de Vieuxpont.
(Lady Anne Clifford restored a number of castles including Skipton, Pendragon, Appleby, Brough and Brougham Castles.
She died at Brougham Castle in 1676 in the same room where her father had been born.
Brougham Castle was left to fall into ruin.
Hotels near - Brougham Castle - Cumbria
Hotels, guesthouses & Bed and Breakfasts in or near Brougham Castle - Cumbria.
Brougham Castle - Cumbria
Brougham Castle was built by Robert de Vieuxpont in 1214 on the site of a Roman fort.
Brougham Castle
Brougham Castle is built next to the River Eamont on the site of an old Roman fort, Brocavum.
A square keep with its entrance on the first floor and access stairs protected by a forebuilding was constructed by Robert de Vipont in the early 13th century.
Brougham Castle, Brougham, Penrith, Cumbria, CA10 2AA
Year 10 History trip to Brougham Castle
May 21st: The day dawned sunny (for once) for the History Department’s annual trip to Brougham Castle.
Brougham Castle
It remained in a state of disrepair until 1661 when Lady Anne Clifford took an interest, as she did with Brougham and Appleby, and started restoration works on the castle.
