Cottingley Fairies

As a result, his inventor, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, is afforded the respect of a near-infallible sleuth.
However, there was one case reported by Conan Doyle that showed some flaws: his support for the reality of the Cottingley Fairies, named after the village in Yorkshire where they were supposedly seen.
One is labelled "Alice and the fairies" (taken in July 1917) and the other "Iris and the dancing gnome" (taken in September 1917, when Frances Griffiths (Alice), who was just 10-years-old, was staying with her 16-year-old cousin Elsie Wright (Iris).
Conan Doyle summarised his views, and those of others, in his book The Coming Of The Fairies [2], that appeared in 1922 and contains the article from the Christmas 1920 edition of The Strand Magazine.
There are still those who believe the Cottingley Fairies existed, and plenty more that have sympathy with the views expressed in the last paragraph above.
According to experts, fairies come in many forms [4,5], in addition to those, like the Cottingley Fairies, that are the common type of benevolent creatures made popular in countless illustrations and films.
1917, July: The Cottingley Fairies
In July 1917, 16-year-old Elsie Wright and her 10-year-old cousin Frances Griffiths were tired of being chided by Elsie's father over their claims of seeing fairies... so they took a photograph of some to prove their existence.
The girls lived together in Cottingley, on the outskirts of Bradford, West Yorkshire, England.
Elsie's mother had developed an interest in things supernatural, and took the pictures to share with a Theosophist meeting in Bradford one evening.
Of the people who believed the fairies were real, the most prominent and vocal was Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, creator of Sherlock Holmes.
The Cottingley Fairies Camera the National Media Museum, Bradford
The Kodak Gallery the National Media Museum in Bradford tells the story of photography, from the earliest cameras right through to the digital cameras of today and amongst their amazing museum they have a rather special camera, the actual one used to capture the world famous Cottingley Fairies.
When 10-year old Frances Griffiths (1907–86) and 17-year old Elsie Wright (1900–88), went out into the garden with Elsie's father's camera in 1917 they returned claiming that they had photographic evidence of fairies living at the bottom of the garden next to Cottingley Beck.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle convinced that they where real used the photographs in his article on fairies in the 1920 Christmas edition of The Strand Magazine bringing the case to the world’s attention.
The Mystery Of The Cottingley Fairies
But that's exactly what happened to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, and more than once too.
Like in the case of the Cottingley Fairies, the most famous and remarkable hoax Doyle, and half the world, fell for.
In the middle of 1917, nine year old Frances Griffiths and her mother left South Africa for the UK.
The Wrights lived in the village of Cottingley in West Yorkshire, where belief in fairies was still very much alive.
The two young cousins often played beside the stream at the bottom of the garden, hoping to see fairies.
Soon, they caught the attention of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Commissioned by The Strand Magazine to write an article on fairies, he decided to use the pictures to accompany it.
Elsie was back in England in 1966, when a reporter from the Daily Express newspaper tracked her down.
Real Fairy Pictures: The Cottingley Fairies & Other Photos of Real Fairies
Elsie with a Cottingley Fairy
2nd photo of Frances with the Cottingley Fairies
The Notorious Cottingley Fairies' Photographs
The Cottingley Fairies' photographs were a collection of five photographs taken by two young girls in Cottingley, England in 1917 through the early 1920s.
There were a total of five fairy photographs taken by Elsie and Frances while in Cottingley, England.
The word spread like wildfire that these two girls had snapped pictures of real fairies living in England and even Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (of Sherlock Holmes fame) preached the word that the fairies were a real species!
The last fairy picture posted here was the fifth and final photograph, taken by Frances Griffiths.
Frances Griffiths apparently claimed that this one was real until her death.
Another large hoax coming out of England more recently is the image to the right of the seemingly mummified remains of a fairy.
Posts Tagged ‘Cottingley Fairy photos’
The Cottingley Fairies
Posted in Arthur Conan Doyle, Fairies, tagged Arthur Conan Doyle, Cottingley Fairy photos, fairies, spiritualism on February 17, 2010 | 7 Comments »
Frances Griffiths, 16, and her cousin Elsie Wright, 10, did.
They claimed to play with dancing fairies along the enchanted stream [the beck] behind Elsie’s house in Cottingley Village, England – and they had 5 photographs to prove it.
Mrs. Wright wanted to believe the girls, as she was a spiritualist.
[Among the country folk in England at the time was a lively fairy-faith. ]
By 1920 the prints had come to the attention of one of the leading spiritualists of the time, Edward Gardner, who examined them and had two new negatives made, clarifying the pictures.
The story of the Cottingley fairies got even more attention when Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (creator of the Sherlock Holmes mysteries) learned of them.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was famous for more than his books.
He immediately believed the Cottingley fairy story and began writing letters to the Wright family in support.
Doyle published his book The Coming of Fairies in 1922, maintaining until his death that the Cottingley fairies were real.
The Cottingley Fairy Photos caused heated debate.
Case of the Cottingley Fairies Paperback – January 5, 1998
This biography examines whether two cousins, Elsie Wright and Frances Griffiths, really witnessed and photographed fairies in the suburb of Cottingley in Bradford over 70 years ago.
It questions why people such as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Edward Gardner were convinced that the photographs were genuine.
This text reveals what the author discovered about the case of the Cottingley fairies, as he worked with the two cousins for six years for the purpose of his research, and found that some of their prevarications become confessions.
However, it also explains how, to her death Frances maintained that "There were fairies at Cottingley", and how one of the photographs has never been satisfactorily explained.
Giving an insider's perspective on the case of the Cottingley fairies, this biography reveals a great deal about the human will to believe the incredible.
@arulprakash94 Arthur Conan Doyle was a convinced (I would even say evangelical) spiritualist.
He even believed in the Cottingley fairies.
10 Great Hoaxes - The Cottingley Fairies
The Cottingley Fairies
This hoax began in 1917 as just some fun for two girls and ended up being an international hoax that lasted for 65 years.
In 1917, two girls (ten-year-old Frances Griffiths and her cousin sixteen-year-old Elsie Wright) had just moved from South Africa to England, specifically to the village of Cottingley.
The two of them often played outside by a stream called Cottingley Beck, much to the annoyance of their parents (since they were always coming in wet and dirty).
It was around this time that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (most known for being the author of the Sherlock Holmes stories) became aware of the photos.
Doyle was an avid spiritualist, and he desired to view the photos to see if he could figure out if they were fake or not.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
Crowborough, England
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, in full Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle (born May 22, 1859, Edinburgh, Scotland—died July 7, 1930, Crowborough, Sussex, England) Scottish writer best known for his creation of the detective Sherlock Holmes—one of the most vivid and enduring characters in English fiction.
Conan Doyle, the second of Charles Altamont and Mary Foley Doyle’s 10 children, began seven years of Jesuit education in Lancashire, England, in 1868.
He later chronicled his travels in supporting the spiritualist cause in The Wanderings of a Spiritualist (1921), Our American Adventure (1923), Our Second American Adventure (1924), and Our African Winter (1929).
He discussed other spiritualist issues in his Case for Spirit Photography (1922), Pheneas Speaks (1927), and a two-volume The History of Spiritualism (1926).
Even spiritualists joined in criticizing Conan Doyle’s article “The Evidence for Fairies,” published in The Strand Magazine in 1921, and his subsequent book The Coming of the Fairies (1922), in which he voiced support for the claim that two young girls, Elsie Wright and Frances Griffiths, had photographed actual fairies that they had seen in the Yorkshire village of Cottingley.
Conan Doyle died in Windlesham, his home in Crowborough, Sussex, and at his funeral his family and members of the spiritualist community celebrated rather than mourned the occasion of his passing beyond the veil.
On July 13, 1930, thousands of people filled London’s Royal Albert Hall for a séance during which Estelle Roberts, the spiritualist medium, claimed to have contacted Sir Arthur.
The Will-O-Wisp advertisement above appeared in ASIA magazine in 1922, so perhaps the name and the fairies had something to do with an incident a couple of years earlier in Cottingley, near Bradford, England.
Two young cousins Elsie Wright (16) and Frances Griffiths (10) alleged that they had photographed fairies near Cottingley Beck (stream).
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, spiritualist and author of the Sherlock Holmes tales, learned of the existence of the the fairy photographs after he was contacted by the editor of the Spiritualist publication LIGHT.
Doyle was convinced that they were incontrovertible evidence of psychic phenomena.
The Cottingley photographs became public in mid-1919 after Elsie Wright’s mother Polly attended a meeting of the Theosophical Society in Bradford.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle  had become aware of the Cottingley photos at about the same time that he’d been commissioned by THE STRAND MAGAZINE to write an article on fairies for their Christmas issue.
In July 1920 the two cousins Elsie and Frances spent a school holiday together in Cottingley so that they could take more photos of the fairies.
The Cottingley fairies bear an uncanny resemblance to illustrations from PRINCESS MARY’S GIFT BOOK, don’t you think?
The controversy over the Cottingley photos continued without Elsie and Frances — the two girls grew up, married, and lived abroad for years.
Elsie said that she and Frances were too embarrassed to confess the truth after they’d succeeded in fooling Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Conan Doyle showed the Cottingley photos to physicist and psychical researcher Sir Oliver Lodge, who believed the photos to be fake.
Despite Lodge’s opinion, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle remained a true believer in spiritualism and in the existence of fairies to the end of his life.
Another of the skeptics of the Cottingley photographs noted that the fairies “looked suspiciously like the traditional fairies of nursery tales” and that they had “very fashionable hairstyles” – which brings us full circle to the  adorable, and stylishly coiffed, fairies on the Will-O-Wisp hair net advertisement.
Frances Griffiths was playing near the stream called cottingley beck and had slipped on wet stepping stones.But something have saved her she didn't knew what.
In that year 1917, Frances griffins just arrived to England from south Africa and her mom and her where staying in their aunts house and Frances and her older cousin would always hang near the stream
The photos had been taken by two young girls, the cousins Frances Griffith and Elsie Wright, while playing in the garden of Elsie's Cottingley village home.
Dear Miss Elsie Wright
I am going to Australia soon, but I only wish before I go that I could get to Bradford and have half an hours chat with you, for I should like to hear all about it.
Spiritualism was born in the fertile religious fervor of immigrant Swedenborgians, Mesmerists, and other religions, a climate of thought receptive to spiritualist ideas.
One of those who would not accept Margaret's confession was Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the creator of the fictional Sherlock Holmes and a convinced believer in spiritualism.
In spite of this, some spiritualists claimed that Houdini had genuine spiritualistic powers, refusing to accept Houdini's own statements that only deception was involved in his performances.
In 1917, two teenage girls in Yorkshire produced photographs they had taken of fairies in their garden.
Elsie Wright (age 16) and her cousin Frances Griffiths (age 10) used a simple camera and were said to be lacking any knowledge of photography or photographic trickery.
But spiritualists, and others who prefer a world of magic and fantasy accepted the photos as genuine evidence for fairies.
If Doyle had noticed this picture, and if he had the sort of perceptiveness he attributed to Sherlock Holmes, he might have concluded that the Cottingley photographs were fakes.
Gardner, Edward L. Fairies, The Cottingley Photographs and their Sequel.
This book has a good account of the Cottingley fairy photos, with pictures.
The Case of the Cottingley Fairies.
"Cottingley: At Last the Truth."
Compares the Cottingley fairy case to reports of UFO sightings.
Parascope has a short account of the Cottingley Fairies.
Would You Believe in the Cottingley Fairies If You Saw Them Today?
In 1917, two little girls took photos of themselves surrounded by what looked like fairies.
One of them, Elsie Wright (1901-88), told the BBC in 1977: “They’re photographs of figments of our imagination.”
Toshio Akai, a humanities and sciences faculty member at Kobe Gakuin University in Japan, explained what it means to take photos “psychically,” in his paper “The Cottingley Fairies Photographs and Spirit Photography.”
Barlow was skeptical at first—he was considered an expert in psychic photography, and particulary in spotting fakes—but when an investigator from the Theosophical Society followed up with Elsie, and her cousin, Frances Griffiths, Barlow was convinced.
Polly Wright, Elsie’s mother, went to a meeting of the Theosophical Society in Bradford in 1919, at which she mentioned the fairy photos to a member, wondering if they might be real.
Joe Cooper, in his 1982 article, “Cottingley: At Last the Truth,” wrote that both Elsie’s parents “searched the girls’ bedroom and waste-paper basket for any scraps of pictures or cut-outs, and also went down to the beck in search of evidence of fakery.
Cottingley fairies
—Truth Magazine on the Cottingley fairies, 5th Janurary, 1921
The Cottingley fairies was a hoax which demonstrates that being a famous novelist doesn't prevent you from being credulous.
In short, Elsie Wright, a wacky art college student, persuaded her ten-year-old cousin, Frances Griffiths, to pose with some cardboard cut-out fairies for a photo in 1917.
Many other spiritualists and paranormal lovers of the day were also happy to indulge the girls (and themselves) that the photos were real, even the obviously faked ones.
See the Wikipedia article on Cottingley Fairies.
His desire to prove the existence of "the invisible world" eventually led him to the Cottingley Fairies, providing some degree of relief from the grief he was still experiencing.
Welcome to the Official Frances Griffiths site.
An official book has just been published containing the memoir’s of Frances Griffiths, the nine year old girl in the famous photograph named by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle as The Fairy Ring.
Frances was nine in the summer of 1917 and twelve in 1920 when she saw fairies in the beck that ran behind the house in Cottingley where she was living with her mother, her Aunt Polly, cousin Elsie and Uncle Arthur Wright.
The Fairy Bower in colour was made from one of the 15 Lantern slides tinted in 1920 by a photographic studio in Wealdstone, Middlesex, owned by a Mr Snelling on the instructions of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Edward Gardner.
The loveliest of the five fairies in that extraordinary photograph can be seen on the front cover of the book:' Reflections of the Cottingley Fairies - Frances Griffiths in her own words'.
Frances only saw what looked like a cocoon in the middle of a nest of grass when she took a snap with the camera given her by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Long Read: The Cottingley Fairies – A Weird British Story of Myth and Hype With a Connection to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
in the summer of 1917, 9-year-old Frances Griffith and her mother left their home in South Africa to go to  the home of her 16-year-old cousin Elsie Wright and her mother in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
Two years after the photos were taken, Mom attended a meeting of Bradford’s Theosophical Society on fairies and showed the two photographs to the speaker near the end of the meeting.
He was working on an article on fairies for a Christmas edition of the Strand, and asked the Wrights for permission to use the photographs.
In his words: “I went off, to Cottingley again, taking the two cameras and plates from London, and met the family and explained to the two girls the simple working of the cameras, giving one each to keep.
Doyle published the original 1917 photos in an article in the Strand, writing a sympathetic account of Frances and Elsie’s encounters, calling them Alice and Iris Carpenter to protect their identities, ending with the words: “The recognition of their existence will jolt the material twentieth century mind out of its heavy ruts in the mud, and will make it admit that there is a glamour and mystery to life.
The photographs, two of the cameras used to make them, Elsie’s watercolours of the fairies, and a 9-page letter of Elsie admitting to the hoax are currently on display at the National Media Museum in Bradford.
A few months later, Frances’ memoirs, Reflections on the Cottingley Fairies were published, containing increasingly bitter correspondence between Frances and Elsie from 1917 to 1983.
