Chicago Board of Trade Building

Chicago Board of Trade Building
141 W. Jackson Blvd., Chicago, Illinois
Chicago Stock Exchange Building
Designed by Adler and Sullivan, the building is an important early skyscraper and was the first in Chicago to make use of caisson foundations.
In February, 1961, it was designated a Chicago Architectural Landmark.
Posted to the National Register of Historic Places on June 16, 1978
Chicago Board of Trade
141 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois, The Loop 60604
It is appropriate that the building so many architecture fans consider the best in Chicago is located nearly at the center of the city.
Chicago Board of Trade is a textbook art deco skyscraper, complete with three-part division, setbacks, light wells, and all the decorative touches that go with a skyscraper of its period, topped off by a pyramid and an aluminum art moderne interpretation of the goddess Ceres.
This is not the first Chicago Board of Trade building at this location.
The original was erected in 1882l, and was the first building in Chicago with electricity.
The CBOT located on skyscraper's 12th floor includes a 19,000 square foot trading floor and has been in almost continuous operation since it opened.
1882: Construction began on the first Chicago Board of Trade Building at this location.
August, 1911: The CBOT filed for a permit with the City of Chicago to build a new 22-story building 200 feet tall.
January 29, 1927: The CBOT filed plans for a 43-story tower with the City of Chicago.
June 2, 1978: This building was named a National Historic Landmark.
June 16, 1978: This building was added to the National Register of Historic Places.
At the time of its completion, this was the tallest building in Chicago.
It was surpassed in 1965 by the Chicago Civic Center (now the Daley Center).
Although the "Chicago Board of Trade" no longer exists, its successor, The CME Group has chosen to keep the building's historic name.
Chicago Board of Trade Building up for sale
CME Group said Monday it is marketing the historic Chicago Board of Trade Building in a deal that would involve the north and south buildings being offered as a partial sale-leaseback.
CME Group acquired the three-building complex at 141 W. Jackson Boulevard in 2007, when it merged with the Chicago Board of Trade.
The Art Deco skyscraper, which was built in 1929, underwent a $22.6 million renovation in 2006.
The renovations were aided by a Class L Cook County tax credit worth about $9.8 million over 12 years.
"CME Group remains committed to our floor based membership and open outcry trading services, which continue to be a profitable part of our business and serve our customers well," said CME Group Chief Financial Officer Jamie Parisi.
Chicago Board of Trade
Sitting at the foot of the LaSalle Street canyon, the 45-story Chicago Board of Trade Building reigns like an Art Deco queen over the city’s financial district.
The building was the tallest structure in Chicago until 1965, when the Richard J. Daley Center eclipsed it.
Chicago Board of Trade
141 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois, The Loop 60604
It is appropriate that the building so many architecture fans consider the best in Chicago is located nearly at the center of the city.
Chicago Board of Trade is a textbook art deco skyscraper, complete with three-part division, setbacks, light wells, and all the decorative touches that go with a skyscraper of its period, topped off by a pyramid and an aluminum art moderne interpretation of the goddess Ceres.
This is not the first Chicago Board of Trade building at this location.
The original was erected in 1882l, and was the first building in Chicago with electricity.
The CBOT located on skyscraper's 12th floor includes a 19,000 square foot trading floor and has been in almost continuous operation since it opened.
1882: Construction began on the first Chicago Board of Trade Building at this location.
August, 1911: The CBOT filed for a permit with the City of Chicago to build a new 22-story building 200 feet tall.
January 29, 1927: The CBOT filed plans for a 43-story tower with the City of Chicago.
June 2, 1978: This building was named a National Historic Landmark.
June 16, 1978: This building was added to the National Register of Historic Places.
At the time of its completion, this was the tallest building in Chicago.
It was surpassed in 1965 by the Chicago Civic Center (now the Daley Center).
Although the "Chicago Board of Trade" no longer exists, its successor, The CME Group has chosen to keep the building's historic name.
The Abel Faidy designed flower shop in Chicago's Board of Trade Building (built 1930) photographed in the 1930s... http://fb.me/6yNrweUnE
Picture is a 1911 view of S. LaSalle Sreet, Chicago, Illinois – the site of my former office.
The Chicago LaSalle Street picture is a view from 1911 and is looking north on LaSalle Street from the Chicago Board of Trade building, showing the old Illinois Trust & Savings Bank at the southeast corner of West Jackson Boulevard and South LaSalle Street in the Loop community area of Chicago, Illinois.
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
Alternate Titles: Board of Trade of the City of Chicago, CBOT
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), in full Board of Trade of the City of Chicago, the first grain futures exchange in the United States, organized in Chicago in 1848.
The Board of Trade began as a voluntary association of prominent Chicago grain merchants.
In 1859 the Board of Trade received a charter from the Illinois legislature and was given power to set quality controls.
After more than a century of trading exclusively in agricultural products such as corn and wheat, the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) broadened its transactions to include financial contracts (1975), futures contracts (1982), and futures-options contracts (1997).
In 2005 the CBOT became a subsidiary of a new public corporation, CBOT Holdings, and in 2007 the corporation merged with Chicago Mercantile Exchange Holdings Inc., a financial futures exchange specializing in options, foreign currency futures, and interest rates.
The new firm—officially known as CME Group Inc., a CME/Chicago Board of Trade Company—handled transactions in financial products, commodities, and alternative futures products such as weather and real estate.
In 2015 the CME Group announced that it would close most of its trading pits for futures contracts later that year, replacing the era of open outcry trading—which had been the main method of trading futures contracts throughout CBOT’s history—with online trading systems.
April 23, 2012|By Alejandra Cancino | Tribune reporter
Chicago-based CME Group Inc. said Monday it sold for about $151.5 million two of three buildings that make the Chicago Board of Trade Building Complex.
The new owners are joint venture between GlenStar Properties LLC and USAA Real Estate Co.
CME, an operator of futures exchanges, acquired the three-building complex in 2007, when it merged with the Chicago Board of Trade.
The Art Deco skyscraper, built in 1929, underwent a $22.6 million renovation in 2006, aided by a Class L Cook County tax credit worth about $9.8 million over 12 years.
In February, CME Group said that it was not accepting the $15 million in TIF funds.
http://goo.gl/PTnhEa  Book a hotel accommodations near Chicago Board of Trade Building #Chicago United States #travel #blogger #blog...
GlenStar Properties, USAA Real Estate Company bring high-end amenities to Chicago Board of Trade building
When GlenStar Properties and USAA Real Estate Company purchased the Chicago Board of Trade Building in 2012, the new owners promised to make changes at the iconic building in downtown Chicago.
Christian Domin, managing director at GlenStar, said that a building as important as the Chicago Board of Trade building, with its long history in the city, deserves an extensive amenities package.
As an example, Domin points to the new gym at Chicago Board of Trade building.
Fitness Formula, the manager of the new Chicago Board of Trade gym, now manages 13 health clubs in Chicago.
The fitness center isn’t the only change that GlenStar and USAA Real Estate Company have brought to the building.
“We are thrilled to be a part of transforming one of the most iconic buildings in Chicago,” said Klein.
Chicago Board of Trade
Located at the highly visible terminus of LaSalle Street, the Chicago Board of Trade is considered to be one of the finest Art Deco style buildings in Chicago.
Due to its significance for architecture and its association with trading, the building is a National Historic Landmark and a City of Chicago Landmark.
Chicago Board of Trade
The Chicago Board of Trade is part of the crux of Chicago's financial district.
Address: 141 W Jackson Blvd, Chicago, IL 60604
County: Cook County
The Lounge-JW Marriott Chicago - 151 West Adams St
Halsted Street Deli - Chicago Board Options Exchange - Chicago Board Options Exchange Building<br /> 400 S. LaSalle St.
Chicago Board of Trade - 141 W Jackson Blvd
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago - 230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago Board Options Exchange - 400 S. LaSalle St.
Skydeck Chicago/The Ledge - 233 S. Wacker Dr.
The Chicago Board of Trade Building(CBOT) has always been my favorite building in downtown Chicago.
This building, sitting at the head of LaSalle Street, with the Federal Reserve Bank and Continental Bank Building flanking it's base is the quintessential Chicago scene.
I think the CBOT Building is the best and most iconic building in Chicago.
The CBOT represents that Chicago is still one of the great Cities of the world.
Chicago Board of Trade Building and Observatory Chicago, Illinois Original Vintage Postcard
Categories: US State & Town Views,Illinois,Chicago
Chicago Board Of Trade Building Earns BOMA 360 Designation In Recognition Of Excellence In Building Management
CHICAGO, IL  – The Chicago Board of Trade Building has been designated a BOMA 360 Performance Building by the Building Owners and Managers Association (BOMA) International.
GlenStar Properties, LLC and partner USAA Real Estate Company purchased The Chicago Board of Trade Building in April 2012.
“We are proud to designate the Chicago Board of Trade Building as a BOMA 360 Performance Building in recognition of the high standards the management team has achieved in every aspect of building operations and management,” said BOMA International Chair Joseph F. Markling.
“By achieving the BOMA 360 designation, the management of the Chicago Board of Trade Building has demonstrated to their owners, tenants, prospective tenants and the community that this property is being managed to the highest standards of excellence.”
Brick and Mortar: Tallest Buildings in Chicago, 1950
This thread examines Chicago's skyscrapers in 1950.
That year, Chicago was comfortably the second largest city in the country, and with twice the population of Detroit, easily the "'Queen City of the Lakes."
A line of towers filed along the street with the first skyscraper, LaSalle Street, and a shorter but equally preserved wall of pre-war buildings sat along South Michigan Avenue, fronting broad Grant Park.
In the year 1950, the Chicago Metro area was one of the world's industrial powerhouses, with the raw materials and crops of the Midwest being refined in the metropolis and sent down the Great Lakes.
The population of Chicago numbered 3,620,962; that mark is the highest in the city's history as the suburbs were about to explode across the surrounding counties.
Cook County was at 4,508,792 inhabitants while Lake County, Indiana had 368,152.
In Illinois, Lake was the most populous suburban county at 179,097.
The mayor that year was Martin Kennelly, while the Cook County Clerk was a 48-year-old politician named Richard J. Daley.
1) Chicago Board of Trade Building, 141 W. Jackson Blvd., 605 feet to Ceres' crown, 1930
2) Chicago Temple Building, 77 W. Washington St., 568 ft, 1924 (Holds the record for highest church above ground level)
(Chicagoarchitecture.info)
The Home Insurance Building, considered the first skyscraper, stood on this site.
(Chicagoarchitecture.info)
(Chicagoarchitecture.info)
27) Chicago Hilton, 320 S. Michigan Ave., 341 ft, 1927
For the first time ever the doors of the vault in the Chicago Board of Trade building opened to the public Sunday.
This first in 83 years was made possible as part of the Chicago Architecture Foundation.
Saturday and Sunday 150 building's throughout Chicago held public tours of Chicago's most treasured building's.
The Chicago Board of Trade was open to the public Sunday from 9 am-5 pm, it was first on my list of things to see.
The Chicago Board of Trade Building was built by Holabird and Root in 1930.
The Chicago Board of Trade Plaza, corner of Jackson and LaSalle.
Since 1930, the Chicago Board of Trade has been operating out of 141 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, in a building designed by architects Holabird & Root that is 605 feet (184 m) tall, the tallest in Chicago until the Richard J. Daley Center superseded it in 1965.
On May 4, 1977, the Chicago Board of Trade Building was designated a Chicago Landmark.
The building is now a National Historic Landmark.
The Chicago Board of Trade Building is owned by Chicago BT Property, LLC.
Redundant HVAC system by way of both chilled water from Thermal Chicago district cooling and the building’s extensive on-site chiller plant.
The entire North Building is designated a Chicago Landmark and the Lobby along with the north facade are on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Chicago Board of Trade Building has been the recipient of the following awards for the renovation and property management excellence.
City of Chicago – 2007 Chicago Landmark Award – Preservation Excellence – Exterior/Interior Renovation
Landmarks Illinois – 2006 Outstanding Commitment to Historic Preservation
