Anthony Roll

The Pepys Library
The Pepys Library (of 3,000 volumes) is a splendid enrichment of the College by one of its most notable sons.
Samuel Pepys (1651) became Secretary to the Admiralty for many years, and President of the Royal Society.
Among the Library's treasures are some sixty medieval manuscripts, some important early printed books (including seven incunabula by Caxton, eight by Wynkyn de Worde, and seven by Pynson), and a naval collection (notably the 'Anthony Roll', illustrating the ships of the Royal Navy c. 1546, such as The Mary Rose, and Drake's autographed nautical pocket almanack).
Pepys Library MS 2991 and British Library Add MS 22047 with Related Material
Here for the first time complete in print is the famous pictorial survey of Henry VIII’s navy compiled in 1546 by Anthony Anthony, a clerk in the ordnance office.
Originally comprising three rolls of vellum, the MS features paintings of each of the king’s 58 ships, below which are set details of their guns, shot, and related equipment.
Two of the original rolls were given by Charles II to Samuel Pepys, who had them cut to form a volume which is one of the treasures of his library, now at Magdalene College, Cambridge.
The present edition re-assembles the three parts of the Anthony Roll, allowing the document to be seen in its original sequence for the first time in over 300 years.
The Anthony Roll - Part 1
Anthony Anthony, a clerk in the Ordnance Office, compiled an illustrated survey of Henry VIII's Navy.
Paintings of fifty-eight ships on three rolls of vellum were presented to the King in 1546.
Later, Charles II gave two of the rolls to Samuel Pepys, who had them cut, and made into a book, which is now in Magdalene College, Cambridge.
The third roll remained in its original form and was sold to the British Museum by Lady Mary Fox, a daughter of William IV.
In 2000, photographs of the paintings, and transcriptions of the associated text, from both book and roll were combined and published as 'The Anthony Roll' (Knighton & Loades, 2000).
Wilson wrote: "The flags on the Anthony Roll are an amazing display.
Lady Mary Fox (née FitzClarence; 19 December 1798 – 13 July 1864) was an illegitimate daughter of King William IV of the United Kingdom by his mistress Dorothea Jordan.
Mary Fox received from her father the second part of the Anthony Roll, which had been in the possession of the royal family since the reign of King Henry VIII of England, though she was probably not interested in the history of the Royal Navy.
Authorship and Anthony Roll
King William IV died in January 1837 and Lady Mary's cousin, Princess Alexandrina Victoria, ascended the throne.
Anthony Roll
In 1680, Charles II, King of England, Scotland and Ireland, gave MP Samuel Pepys two rolls of a record of ships from the Tudors' Navy.
The record had been written and presented by a man called Anthony Anthony to King Henry VIII in 1546, and it depicted 58 vessels from that time.
Having Samuel Pepys - one of the richest and prestigious English politicians and nobles of the time - been given two of the three rolls, which he latter cut up and made into one volume, the Crown kept the third one until William IV gave it to Mary Fox, his daughter.
Mary Fox then sold it, in 1858, to the British Museum.
So whoever actually sees these rolls - now called the Anthony Roll - may enter the deepen world of Henry VIII, Bloody Mary and, of course, Elizabeth.
The Anthony Roll is, actually, a very well-made picture of that era.
I actually saw them when I went to England, one month ago, in the Pepys Library (Magdalene College, Cambridge).
The third Anthony Roll, which I wasn't able to see, is owned currently by the British Library.
The Mary Rose as seen in the 1540's Anthony Roll which inventoried 58 naval vessels.
Caption: English galley in the 16th-century Anthony Roll.
These three rolls, presented to King Henry VIII in 1546, are a record of 58 ships of the English Tudor navy in the 1540s.
Portrait of Samuel Pepys by J. Hayls.
Portrait of Samuel Pepys by J. Hayls.
Samuel Pepys entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, as a scholar in October 1651.
As is natural, the Pepys Library (apart from the original manuscript of the Diary) is best known for its many books connected with the sea.
I suppose that the fine flower of this, both for its historical importance and the interest attaching to its provenance, is the so-called Anthony Roll.
This is an illustrated description of the navy of Henry VIII made for him in 1541 by Sir Anthony Anthony.
There are two other books which may be said to be pendants to the Anthony Roll.
Some manuscripts and printed books in the Pepys Library, ranging from medieval manuscripts to Newton’s and Pynsons are large for a library of this size.
One aspect of the Pepys Library which has till recently been unrecognized is that much of it is French.
Henry also commissioned the Anthony Roll (now in the Pepys Library), a survey of his navy as it was around 1546, from which comes much of the pictorial evidence for his ships.
Above: The warship Mary Rose as depicted in the Anthony Roll, a record of ships in the English Tudor navy produced during the 1540s (Gerry Bye, Wikimedia Commons)
One of King Henry VIII’s ships, it is pictured here on the Anthony Roll, an illustrated record of ships in the Tudor Navy, 1546.
Here for the first time complete in print is the famous pictorial survey of Henry VIII's navy compiled in 1546 by Anthony Anthony, a clerk in the ordnance office.
Originally comprising three rolls of vellum, the MS features paintings of each of the king's 58 ships, below which are set details of their guns, shot, and related equipment.
Two of the original rolls were allegedly given by Charles II to Samuel Pepys, who had them cut to form a volume which is one of the treasures of his library, now at Magdalene College, Cambridge.
The present edition re-assembles the three parts of the Anthony Roll, allowing the document to be seen in its original sequence for the first time in over 300 years.
He's building up a reference library, and I recommended a copy of The Anthony Roll.
This is a record of Henry VIII's navy compiled in 1546 by Anthony Anthony, a surveyor in the ordnance office*.
Samuel Pepys, Secretary of the Admiralty
Two of the three rolls* were given by Charles II to Samuel Pepys (who among other things had an antiquarian interest in the history of the Royal Navy) in 1680.
The Pepys Library (photo from the College website)
The third part of the roll was thought lost, but turned our to have remained in royal hands until William IV (another naval figure worth blogging about) gave it to his illegitimate daughter, Mary Fox, who was married to a bibliophile and Surveyor-General of the Ordnance.
