Catherine de' Medici's building projects

Catherine (Caterina) de Medici married Henry Duke of Orleans (future King Henry II) of France in 1533.
These included, most notably, the four sons of her aunt Clarissa, who had been evicted from Florence by Alessandro.
Leone later died in attempt to take back Florence from a rival Medici.
Catherine was also supported by the Florence merchant Antonio Gondi and his French wife Marie-Catherine (who became her treasurer), and their sons, particularly Alberto Gondi, Trustee, Marshal, and Comte/Duke of Retz.
Clement tried to quickly solidify his position by forming the League of Cognac between the Papal States, Florence, Venice, France, and England, all against the Habsburgs.
This Cosimo became Duke of Florence and Grand Duke of Tuscany by 1537.
To gain Florence, Cosimo had aligned himself with the Habsburg king Charles V, which put him at odds with his Medici kinswoman Catherine Queen of France.
Giovanni’s brother Giulano also married into French royalty (the aunt of King Francis) and consequently became Duke of Nemours (south-east of Paris).
The Medici family had already become European royalty, and all this before Catherine daughter of Lorenzo II married Henry II of France and became mother-in-law of Mary Queen of Scots.
Mrs Billington's lecture began in Florence with the birth of Catherine de' Medici who eventually played such an important part in the history of the French Court.
Catherine was born in 1519 to an Italian father Lorenzo II de' Medici and a French mother.
The Pope then arranged her marriage to Henry the second son of Francis I of France for a huge dowry; Catherine was 14 years old.
In 1533 Henry's elder brother Francis contracted a fever and died.
Two days after the wedding of Catherine's daughter Margaret to Henry of Navarre in Paris hundreds of Huguenots were murdered -The massacre of St Bartholomew plunging the country into civil war
In the 17th century, the Jardin des Tuileries in Paris, France was opened as the first public park in Europe.
However, in 1871 the palace was looted and burned during the suppression of the Paris Commune.
The Tuileries palace was centered on the Axe historique, which extends from the center of Paris to the West.
The address is Rue de Rivoli, Ile-de-France, Paris, France, 75001.
So, when Louis IV looked out the front windows of the Tuileries Palace, he was reminded that he was King of this vast and beautiful place.
Since it was opened as the first public park Parisians of all classes and cultures have used the garden as a place to meet, eat lunch, and socialize.
It is conveniently located near le Louvre and la Place de Concorde in central Paris.
The following bus lines stop in front of the Pyramid of the Louvre: 21, 24, 27, 39, 48, 68, 69, 72, 81, 95, and the Paris Open Tour bus and the Jardin des tuileries is within walking distance from here.
"Paris."
"The Concert Spirituel in the Tuileries Palace."
"Tuileries Palace."
In 1533, aged 14, Catherine was married to Henri of Orleans.
Catherine de' Medici (13 April 1519 - 5 January 1589) was born in Florence, Italy, as Caterina Maria Romula di Lorenzo de' Medici.
Takes about 40 mins to drive from Blois.
Henry II (1519-1559) of France was the second son of Francis I (1494-1547) and Claude de France (1498-1524) born in 1519 in St. Germain-en-Laye.
In 1533 already, as a 14-year-old boy, for reasons of state, he was married to the same aged Catherine de Medici (1519-1589), as her uncle was Pope Clement VII (1478-1534).
In a city that has been investigated and documented as much as Paris, not much remains that has a glimmer of mystery.
The column itself is the only remaining vestige of a royal palace know as the Hôtel de la Reine.
It was eventually sold on again to the city of Paris, and has stood firmly in place whilst first the palace was demolished, then two other buildings were built around it (initially the Halle aux Blés, then today’s Bourse de Commerce).
A few weeks ago a hairpin belonging to Catherine de Medici, Queen of France in the 16th century, was found at Fontainebleau Palace, a royal residence outside of Paris.
Queen Claude of France
Queen Claude of France is the first person recognized to use the interlocking Cs as her insignia.
The interlocking Cs are found at the Château Royal de Blois, where “the symbol was carved in white in the apartments of France’s Queen Claude, who found in the inital “C” an inspiring personal motto: candidior candidis – the fairest of the fair.”
(The Secret of Chanel Nº5, Tilar J. Mazzeo, p.107)  We get a clearer picture of Queen Claude’s personal apartments  in Catherine de Medici, where the authors state: “the apartments of Queen Claude of France…in which may still be seen, delicately carved, the double C accompanied by figures, purely white, of swans and lilies signifying / candidior candidis / – more white than the whitest – the motto of the queen whose name began, like that of Catherine [de Medici] with a C…” (Catherine ‘de Medici, Honoré de Balzac and Katharine Prescott Wormeley, p.54)
Queen Claude of France was Catherine de Medici’s mother-in-law – Catherine de Medici joined the French royals upon her marriage to Claude’s second son Henri II.
A few weeks ago a hairpin belonging to Catherine de Medici, Queen of France in the 16th century, was found at Fontainebleau Palace, a royal residence outside of Paris.
The "C" Ladies: Queen Claude of France, Catherine de Medici and Gabrielle "Coco" Chanel
Queen Claude of France
Queen Claude of France is the first person recognized to use the interlocking Cs as her insignia.
The interlocking Cs are found at the Château Royal de Blois, where “the symbol was carved in white in the apartments of France’s Queen Claude, who found in the inital “C” an inspiring personal motto: candidior candidis – the fairest of the fair.”
(The Secret of Chanel Nº5, Tilar J. Mazzeo, p.107)  We get a clearer picture of Queen Claude’s personal apartments  in Catherine de Medici, where the authors state: “the apartments of Queen Claude of France…in which may still be seen, delicately carved, the double C accompanied by figures, purely white, of swans and lilies signifying / candidior candidis / – more white than the whitest – the motto of the queen whose name began, like that of Catherine [de Medici] with a C…” (Catherine ‘de Medici, Honoré de Balzac and Katharine Prescott Wormeley, p.54)
Queen Claude of France was Catherine de Medici’s mother-in-law – Catherine de Medici joined the French royals upon her marriage to Claude’s second son Henri II.
and from places or cities where these dishes were done frequently or originated, they were taken by Chefs that went to other countries (Catherine de Medici when she married a French hot shot, complained to her Italian father that the food there was lousy.
In 1547 she acquired the château of Montceaux-en-Brie (Seine-et-Marne), and in 1560 she compelled her husband’s mistress Diane de Poitiers to surrender the château of Chenonceau to her.
In 1563 she acquired the château of Saint-Maur-Les-Fossés, near Charenton, and began to assemble the lands at the gates of Paris that were to constitute her estate of the Tuileries.
In 1570 she bought another property in Paris in the parish of St Eustache.
At the death of Henry II, however, she replaced de L’Orme with Francesco Primaticcio as head of the Bâtiments du Roi, and he built the Aile de la Belle Cheminée  at the château of Fontainebleau and designed the circular, domed Chapelle des Valois at Saint-Denis Abbey as a funerary chapel for the royal family.
After his death in 1570 she turned to his former associate Jean Bullant, to continue work at the Tuileries, the Maison de St Eustache, and the Chapelle des Valois, and to complete her Paris town house near St Eustache (of which only the astonishing observatory in the form of a colossal Doric column survives).
Catherine was probably also responsible for the construction at the Palais du Louvre, Paris, of the flat-roofed Basse Galerie, the forerunner of the Petite Galerie designed to connect the Louvre with the Tuileries.
Catherine’s major sculptural commissions were given to Germain Pilon, who executed for her the monument for the heart of Henry II for the church of the Celestines in Paris, the bronze figures for Henry’s tomb designed by Primaticcio at Saint-Denis, as well as the Risen Christ and the Virgin of Sorrows intended for the Chapelle des Valois.
“The ravishing gardens at such good location in Paris”
Wherever You take a glimpse at, You will see some of the greatest monuments in Paris, as the Place de la Concorde and further across the princely Champs Elysees to the magnificent Arc de Triomphe at the end of regal Elysees.
Here on the benches and on metal chairs, beside the freshness of the pond's waters, You may relax and get rid of the all strains collected during the whole day in Paris.
That was Catherine de Medicis, that created these gardens as the Tuileries Palace in 1564, opened to the public in 1667 and became a public park only after the French Revolution.
Rather long history of this very popular park among the Parisiens and foreigners span from the Henry IV all the way to the XX century.
Julia Siemon: “Bronzino, Politics and Portraiture in 1530s Florence” (Columbia, M. Cole, D. Freedberg)
Zachary Stewart: “The Integrated Interior: Parish Church Architecture in Eastern England, c.1330–c.1550” (Columbia, S. Murray)
Lerner, Jillian Taylor, "Panoramic Literature: Marketing Illustrated Journalism in July Monarchy Paris" (Columbia, J. Crary, A. Higonnet)
Van Liefferinge, Stefaan, "The Choir of Notre-Dame of Paris: An Inquiry into Twelfth-Century Mathematics and Early Gothic Architecture" (Columbia, S. Murray)
Cohen, Meredith, "The Sainte-Chapelle of Paris: Image of Authority and Locus of Identity" (Columbia, S. Murray)
Feldman, Hannah, "National Negotiations: Art, Historical Experience, and the Public in Paris, 1945-1962" (Columbia, B. Buchloh, R. Krauss)
Laxton, Susan, "Paris as Gameboard: Lucid Strategies in Surrealism" (Columbia, R. Krauss)
Assonitis, Alessio, "The Art and Savonorolism in Florence and Rome" (Columbia, J. Beck)
Catterson, Lynn, "Donatello's Legacy and the Training of Michelangelo: Sculptural Practice in Quattrocento Florence" (Columbia, J. Beck)
Baker, George, "Lost Objects: Francis Picabia and Dada in Paris, 1919-1924" (Columbia, B. Buchloh, R. Krauss)
Lewallen, Nina, "The Aristocratic Town House in Regency Paris: Hôtel du Maine and Hôtel de Matignon" (Columbia H. Ballon)
Nikou, Mehrangiz, "National Architecture and International Politics: The Pavilions of Near Eastern Nations in Paris International Exposition of 1867" (Columbia, R. Middleton)
Steeves, Cathryn, "The Hôtel de Ville of Paris: The Architecture, Urbanism and Politics of François I" (Columbia, H. Ballon)
Fulton, Christopher, "The Medici Palace Collection of Fifteenth-Century Florence: A Study in the Privatization of Art" (Columbia, J. Beck)
Florence, Italy
Blois, France
Catherine de Médicis, Italian Caterina de’ Medici (born April 13, 1519, Florence [Italy]—died January 5, 1589, Blois, France) queen consort of Henry II of France (reigned 1547–59) and subsequently regent of France (1560–74), who was one of the most influential personalities of the Catholic–Huguenot wars.
Orphaned within days, Catherine was highly educated, trained, and disciplined by nuns in Florence and Rome and married in 1533 by her uncle, Pope Clement VII, to Henry, duc d’Orléans, who inherited the French crown from his father, Francis I, in April 1547.
The issue of war or peace in the Netherlands was closely linked with the Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day in Paris on August 23–24, 1572.
First, after some hesitation and inconsistency, the King assumed the responsibility by a declaration of August 26 in the Parlement of Paris, and “the crown” has been taken to mean Catherine.
Thus, despite the heroic efforts of Catherine’s old age, France was sinking into chaos when she died at Blois eight months before the murder of Henry III.
Sadly, they're all deluded, because as everyone knows, creme brulee was invented single handedly by Catherine de Medici when she left Italy to bring cuisine to the barbarians.
