Capon Chapel

Capon Chapel is a mid-19th-century church near the town of Capon Bridge in the US state of West Virginia.
A Baptist congregation began gathering at the site of the present-day church as early as 1756 and has served has a place of worship ever since.
Capon Chapel, along with its cemetery, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2012 in recognition of its rural religious architecture representative of the Potomac Highlands region, and for its service as a rural church in Hampshire County.
Capon Bridge United Methodist Charge
Capon Bridge, Capon Chapel, Central,
You can mail cash donations to: Amazing Grace Baptist Church P.O. Box 540, Capon Bridge, WV 26711
Capon Bridge 11 AM.
If you use Facebook, maybe you’ll join one of these groups: Capon Bridge United Methodist Charge and/or North River Mills United Methodist Church.
Capon Bridge United Methodist Parsonage Committee have cookbooks available for $10.
Churches in Capon Bridge, WV
Churches in West Virginia
Capon Bridge Foursquare Church
Capon Bridge United Methodist Church
Files in category "Built in Virginia in 1852"
1852 in Virginia
Built in the United States in 1852
Capon Chapel (Capon Bridge, West Virginia)
Houses built in Virginia in 1852
Capon Chapel - Cultural Feature (Church) in Hampshire County
Capon Chapel is a cultural feature (church) in Hampshire County.
Category:	West Virginia physical, cultural and historic features
County:	Hampshire County
Capon Bridge, WV (1.9 miles NNE)
Country: United States
Country: United States
Capon Chapel United Methodist Church, Capon Bridge
26711 Capon Bridge
Ex officio non-voting members present were Joe Geiger, director of Archives and History, serving as secretary to the commission; Dr. Michael Hohn, director, West Virginia Geological and Economic Survey; Jeremy Morris, president, Preservation Alliance of West Virginia; Susan Pierce, director, Historic Preservation Section; ex officio non-voting members absent were Charles Morris, director, Museums Section; and Randall Reid-Smith, commissioner of Culture and History.
Mr. Armstrong noted that Courthouse Facilities was doing a survey of the condition of West Virginia courthouses and asked if SHPO was involved.
Old Pine Church, Hampshire County, nominated under Criterion C, Architecture, with period of significance being 1838, was presented by Sandra Scaffidi.
Capon Chapel, Hampshire County, nominated under Criterion C, Architecture, and Criterion Consideration A, Religious Properties, with period of significance being ca. 1852, was presented by Sandra Scaffidi.
Ms. Hyatt stated that oral records note the church was formed in 1756 and that the molding was just a decorative treatment.
Valley View, Hampshire County, nominated under Criterion C, Architecture, with period of significance being 1855, was presented by Courtney Fint Zimmerman.
Springfield Brick House, Hampshire County, nominated under Criterion C, Architecture, with period of significance being ca. 1855, was presented by Courtney Fint Zimmerman.
Mr. Armstrong noted that the stump was unique for West Virginia, but disagreed with it being listed under Art since it was commercially manufactured.
Mr. Armstrong asked what portion of the island was in West Virginia and was informed the entire island was included in the state’s boundaries.
Ms. Pierce noted that Ohio SHPO had prepared the nomination, but it was a cooperative effort with West Virginia.
Mr. Armstrong believed that the Ohio SHPO should have looked at previous controversies regarding the nomination and should have given the commission and the West Virginia SHPO more time to review it.
Old Pine Church (also historically known as Mill Church, Nicholas Church, and Pine Church) is a mid-19th century church near the unincorporated community of Purgitsville in the U.S. state of West Virginia.
Old Pine Church is among the earliest extant log churches in Hampshire County, along with Capon Chapel and Mount Bethel Church.
Old Pine Church and its cemetery are located along the steeply-sloped Old Pine Church Road (West Virginia Secondary Route 220/15), approximately 1.66 miles (2.67 km) south of the unincorporated community of Purgitsville.
Old Pine Church is located in a rural area of southwestern Hampshire County within the Mill Creek valley.
[13] The Mill Creek valley was one of the first parts of present-day Hampshire County to be settled by whites, beginning in the mid-18th century.
[18] While many residents in Hampshire County prior to the American Civil War were slaveholders, it is thought that Brethren adherents in the county did not own slaves or depend upon slave labor.
[20] In Dr. Emmert F. Bittinger's historical research on the Brethren Church in Hampshire County in his Allegheny Passage (1990), it is noted that the Church of the Brethren denomination recognized Old Pine Church as belonging to the larger Beaver Run congregation, which was centered approximately 10 miles (16 km) south of Old Pine Church.
[18] The Beaver Run congregation was the first organization of the Brethren in Hampshire County.
In 2008, the Hampshire County Historic Landmarks Commission and the Hampshire County Commission embarked upon an initiative to place structures and districts on the National Register of Historic Places following a series of surveys of historic properties throughout the county.
[25] The county received funding for the surveying and documentation of Hampshire County architecture and history from the State Historic Preservation Office of the West Virginia Division of Culture and History.
[25] According to Hampshire County Commission's compliance officer, Charles Baker, places of worship were not typically selected for inclusion in the register; however, Old Pine Church and Capon Chapel were exceptions because both "started out as meeting houses".
According to architectural historian Sandra Scaffidi, the simple form and construction of Old Pine Church is indicative of the early settlers' access to materials, and it serves as an example of the log construction techniques in religious architecture of the Hampshire County's earliest settlers.
List of historic sites in Hampshire County, West Virginia
National Register of Historic Places listings in Hampshire County, West Virginia
Old Fields Quadrangle – West Virginia (Map).
United States Geological Survey.
Geographic Names Information System, United States Geological Survey.
Geographic Names Information System, United States Geological Survey.
Hampshire Review (Romney, West Virginia).
Historic Hampshire: A Symposium of Hampshire County and Its People, Past and Present.
Parsons, West Virginia: McClain Printing Company.
History of Hampshire County, West Virginia From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present.
Morgantown, West Virginia: A. Brown Boughner, Printer.
Hampshire County, West Virginia, 1754–2004.
Romney, West Virginia: The Hampshire County 250th Anniversary Committee.
United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service.
The Allegheny Frontier: West Virginia Beginnings, 1730–1830.
United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service.
Media related to Old Pine Church (Purgitsville, West Virginia) at Wikimedia Commons
(1) a historic Presbyterian church located at Lewisburg, Greenbrier County, West Virginia
(2) a mid-19th century church near the unincorporated community of Purgitsville in the U.S. state of West Virginia
(3) a historic Lutheran church located near Brandywine, Pendleton County, West Virginia
(4) a historic Methodist church near Evans, Jackson County, West Virginia
(1) a group of historic dwellings located at Charleston, West Virginia
(2) a rural historic district near Shepherdstown, West Virginia
(3) a historic home located at St. Albans, West Virginia
(4) a historic home located near Romney, Hampshire County, West Virginia
Capon Chapel (pronunciation: /ˈkeɪpən/ KAY-pən), also historically known as Capon Baptist Chapel and Capon Chapel Church, is ________.
(1) an unusual octagonal Methodist church located near the settlement of Sand Ridge, West Virginia
(2) a historic non-denominational chapel located at 668 Mountain Lake Road in Hedgesville, Berkeley County, West Virginia
(3) a mid-19th century United Methodist church located near to the town of Capon Bridge, West Virginia in the United States
(1) a historic home located at Charleston, West Virginia
(2) a historic home located at Franklin, Pendleton County, West Virginia
(3) a historic home located at Springfield, Hampshire County, West Virginia
(4) a historic home located at Charleston, West Virginia
(1) a Presbyterian church located at the junction of County Route 5 (Jersey Mountain Road) and County Route 5/4 (Three Churches Hollow Road) in the unincorporated community of Three Churches north of Romney in Hampshire County, West Virginia, United States
(2) a historic Christian house of worship affiliated with the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) and located at the intersection of Sussex Turnpike and Church Road in the Mount Freedom section of Randolph Township in Morris County, New Jersey, United States
October 2 Wikipedia featured article: Capon Chapel is a mid-19th-century church near the town of Capon Bridge ... http://bit.ly/1MLLJi7
Capon Chapel, West Virginia
Capon Chapel is a Church in Hampshire County, WV with an elevation of 869 feet, or 265 meters above sea level.
This place is also known as Capon Baptist Chapel and Capon Chapel Church.Place Type
William C. Nixon (b. April 11, 1789, d. February 19, 1869)
William C. Nixon (son of George Sr.
Notes for William C. Nixon:
Historically the church was affiliated with the Primitive Baptists, whose chief spokesperson was the Rev. Dr. John Monroe.
More About William C. Nixon:
More About William C. Nixon and Mary Ann Caudy:
Children of William C. Nixon and Mary Ann Caudy are:
+Lemuel Nixon, b. December 23, 1818, Capon Bridge, d. March 12, 1900.
