Book of Kells

Named after the Abbey of Kells, some forty miles north of Dublin, where it was held for centuries, the Book of Kells was produced around the year 800 CE, probably in both Scotland and Ireland.
It is a text of the four Gospels in Latin, employing expert calligraphy and decoration, rare colors, and other embellishments that make it a true work of art.
Paying homage to the incredible artistry of the Book of Kells, this set of three notebooks are part of a line of exquisitely crafted gift products celebrating the most important surviving work of Celtic art and Ireland’s greatest national treasure.
Trinity College is known in full as the College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity of Queen Elizabeth near Dublin, is a research university and the sole constituent college of the University of Dublin in Ireland.
The college was founded in 1592 as the “mother” of a new university, modelled after the collegiate universities of Oxford and of Cambridge, but, unlike these, only one college was ever established; as such, the designations “Trinity College” and “University of Dublin” are usually synonymous for practical purposes.
It is one of the seven ancient universities of Britain and Ireland, as well as Ireland’s oldest university.
The Book of Kells is the most famous of the volumes in the Trinity College Library.
The Book of Kells is an illuminated manuscript Gospel book in Latin, containing the four Gospels of the New Testament together with various prefatory texts and tables.
It was created in a Columbian monastery in either Britain or Ireland or may have had contributions from various Columbian institutions from both Britain and Ireland.
The text of the Gospels is largely drawn from the Vulgate, although it also includes several passages drawn from the earlier versions of the Bible known as the Vetus Latina.
It is a masterwork of Western calligraphy and represents the pinnacle of insular illumination.
It is also widely regarded as Ireland’s finest national treasure.
The illustrations and ornamentation of the Book of Kells surpass that of other Insular Gospel books in extravagance and complexity.
Also known as the Book of Columba.
The name "Book of Kells" is derived from the Abbey of Kells in Kells, County Meath in Ireland, where it was kept for much of the medieval period.
The Book of Kells contains the text of the four gospels based on the Vulgate.
It does not, however, contain a pure copy of the Vulgate.
There are numerous variants from the Vulgate, where Old Latin translations are used rather than Jerome's text.
They are almost always shown together so that the doctrine of unity of message of the four Gospels is emphasised.
Department:Manuscripts & Archives Research Library, Trinity College Dublin
Is part of:Mediaeval and Renaissance Latin Manuscripts
Abstract: The Book of Kells contains the four Gospels in Latin based on the Vulgate text which St Jerome completed in 384AD, intermixed with readings from the earlier Old Latin translation.
Latin.
Illumination of books and manuscripts, Medieval--Ireland
Manuscripts, Medieval--Ireland
Copyright: Copyright 2012 The Board of Trinity College Dublin.
Publication, transmission or display is prohibited without formal written approval of Trinity College Library, Dublin.
The Book of Kells is the centrepiece of an exhibition which attracts over 500,000 visitors to Trinity College in Dublin City each year.
Written around the year 800 AD, the Book of Kells contains a richly decorated copy of the four gospels in a latin text, based on the Vulgate edition (completed by St. Jerome in 384 AD).
The Irish people are mostly descended from Dan and came to Ireland at various times, under various names, as they migrated by different routes and arrived at different times, having picked up new names along the way.
After the Tuatha de Danaans came to Ireland, there were, at various times, further immigrations of Danites under the name Milesians (sons of Mil, who was a Danite warrior, from which the name milesian later came to mean warrior) and of course later still as Dan-ish Vikings and Norsemen.
Jesus told his disciples and the writers of the four Gospels:- Matthew; Mark; Luke and John to go to the "lost" sheep of the "House of Israel", the Ten "Lost" Tribes scattered abroad and to make disciples of all nations.
James the Lord's brother later wrote to all twelve tribes*; after the final dispersion of the remnant of the remaining two tribes by the Romans; in his letter in the New Testament.
The four emblems represent the tribes of Israel to whom the Gospels were to be preached and that is why they are, quite rightly, on the pages of the "Book of Kells", in Ireland, because the Irish are Israelites, as I have previously explained.
But its age and its design, although damaged, allow us a glorious glimpse into the art and style of ancient Ireland.
Later, during the Viking raids of the 9th century, it was moved for its protection to Kells Monastery, County Meath, Ireland.
In 1661, it was returned to Ireland and given to Trinity College of Dublin by Archbishop Ussher.
The major points of the argument are, first, that a novel twist on a now well-known trick of free-fusion stereoscopic viewing would have enabled the artists to achieve the magnification of errors needed to work in microscopic detail, but only in the context of repeating patterns such as characteristic of Insular illumination; second, that the viewing trick is the only apparent means by which a normally sighted artist could have achieved sufficiently high magnification, given the technology of the time; third, that a specific set of procedures for using this trick should have sufficed to create the illumination in question, including templates for the designs; and fourth, that Insular illumination of the finest quality shows definite signs of having been created with the hypothesized technique, whereas typical examples in the remaining 80-odd Insular manuscripts do not.
One of the great masterpieces in the History of Irish art, and a world-famous example of early Christian art, the Book of Kells (Leabhar Cheanannais) is the most famous of the illuminated manuscripts, produced by Irish monks about 800 CE.
Also known as the Book of Columba, or the Gospel of Colum Cille, the Book of Kells includes the four Gospels of the New Testament written in Latin, decorated with innumerable illuminations, illustrations and miniature images in a blaze of colour.
It is on permanent display at Trinity College Dublin Library in Ireland.
The name "Book of Kells" comes from the Abbey of Kells in County Meath, Ireland, where it was preserved during medieval times.
In 804, after two Viking raids, the monks of Iona fled from their exposed island monastery to Meath, in Ireland.
After the surrender of the monastery of Kells to the Crown by Abbot Richard Plunket in 1539, the manuscript passed into the hands of one Geralde Plunket of Dublin, possibly a relative of the abbot, and from Plunket to James Ussher; a highly versatile and accomplished scholar of the day, and one of the earliest students of Trinity College, Dublin.
Furthermore, it is highly unlikely that Columba even wrote the script, since paleographic research shows that the style of Latin script used did not emerge until well after his death.
There is no question but that the Book of Kells is Ireland's finest example of Biblical art and its richest illuminated manuscript in graphic invention, colour and fantasy.
The Book of Kells is one of a number of illuminated books created by Irish artists in monastries in Ireland, Scotland and England.
The Secret of Kells is an independent animated film out of Ireland, that broke into the US as a surprise pick for the 2009 Academy Awards, beating out Hayao Miyazaki’s Ponyo for a Best Animated Feature Film nod.
TM: The main inspiration of course is the Book of Kells itself, which is a national treasure in Ireland and kind of one of the high points of medieval art.
: The poet would fall asleep and he’d dream about Ireland coming to talk to him in the form of this beautiful woman.
But she does represent that kind of goddess figure, that kind of older belief system that preceded Christianity…Growing up in that culture, there’s a very peculiar type of Catholicism in Ireland, especially in rural Ireland, where you’ve got a lot of old Pagan beliefs and ideas about fairies and stuff mingled in with Catholicism .
… So it’s interesting to me that the old faith and the new faith have mingled in Ireland, but there’s a universal truth in the stuff…I think that’s what’s interesting for me….
Especially in Ireland because Don Bluth had a studio in Dublin.
The idea that animation on that level was being made in Ireland kind of made it seem more accessible.
TM: It was really nice to do such a lush job on the DVD here in the States; in Ireland we didn’t have as many features and in France, I’m not a particularly good French speaker so I didn’t do a commentary – just an interview that they’d have to translate.
The Book of Kells, of which our copy is a replica, was written more than 1,200 years ago by monks in medieval Ireland.
The Book of Kells derives its name from the Irish village of Kells, located northwest of Dublin, where the book was kept in the monastery for several hundred years.
The Book of Kells contains the four gospels inscribed in Latin in an intricate style known as insular majuscule script.
The colors and dyes which were used in the painting of the illuminations were brought to Ireland from as far away as Asia.
In 1661 the Book of Kells was transferred from Kells to the Trinity College Library in Dublin, where it has been safeguarded ever since.
Ireland // Dublin //
Although they looted the book’s cumdach or metal shrine cover, the pagan Norsemen did not value the book itself, however, and despite spending some time buried underground and losing thirty folios, it survived at Kells up to the seventeenth century when it was taken to Dublin for safekeeping during the Cromwellian Wars.
The 340 calfskin folios of the Book of Kells contain the four New Testament gospels along with preliminary texts, all in Latin.
Besides interesting temporary exhibitions of books and prints from the library’s collection, the Long Room also displays a gnarled fifteenth-century harp, the oldest to survive from Ireland, and a rare original printing of the 1916 Proclamation of the Irish Republic, made on Easter Sunday in Dublin’s Liberty Hall.
One page of the book will be displayed each week, in the same way the pages of the original are displayed at Trinity College in Dublin to a half million people each year.
And perhaps the most representative piece of Celtic and Irish art is the Book of Kells, an ornately decorated, very unique copy of the New Testament of the Bible.
The theories of present are that the Book of Kells was created in either Kells, an island between Ireland and Scotland called Iona, or from a church in Northumberland.
While no one can be precisely sure where it was created, the calligraphy and illuminations can all be traced to Ireland and its Gaelic past.
From this time to 1653 the Book of Kells was actually in Kells until it was decided that it ought to be moved to Dublin for safe-keeping.
Then in 1661 the Book was given to Trinity College Library and has been on display there since the mid-19th century.
The Book of Kells is in fact a copy of the New Testament of the Bible.
It originated twelve hundred years ago, most likely in Iona, a small island between Scotland and Ireland, and was soon moved to the town of Kells in Ireland.
After spending eight hundred and fifty years there it moved to Dublin, and shortly after that to its current home in the Trinity College Library where it was put on display and can still be seen today.
The Book of Kells (Irish: Leabhar Cheanannais)
Where to see it: Old Library, Trinity College Dublin, 01-8962320, tcd.ie/ library/bookofkells
‘Ireland in 100 Objects’ is now available as an interactive app for iPad, iPhone, Kindle Fire, and most Android tablets, and as an ebook.
The Book of Kells at Trinity College, Dublin
Ireland’s Finest National Treasure
During my recent visit to Dublin, Ireland I was able to make my way over to the Old Library at Trinity College, home to the Book of Kells Exhibit.
Making its way from a scriptorium of the monastery founded near 561 by St. Colum Cille on Iona, just off the western coast of Scotland, the Book of Kells has become widely known as the most stunning, elaborate, and lavish work of Insular illumination in history.
Made ca. 800 (or even earlier) by Celtic monks, is an illuminated manuscript written in Latin that contains the four Gospels of the New Testament.
Mainly based on the Vulgate, it also contains passages from early versions of the Bible, the Vetus Latina.
Its extravagant illustrations and ornate details surmounts other Insular Gospel books.
