7 World Trade Center

This was the first time in history that a steel-framed high-rise had collapsed due to fire.
[12] And indeed, many members of the Fire Department of New York are on record as having been confidently waiting for the building to come down.
There were hundreds of firefighters waiting to — they were waiting for 7 World Trade Center to come down.”
The oral histories recording the personal 9/11 accounts of approximately 503 members of the Fire Department of New York, “Oral Histories From Sept. 11 Compiled by the New York Fire Department” (World Trade Center Task Force Interviews), are available on the website of The New York Times.Additional reports to those listed below include:
We were just doing whatever little things we could do, but they were waiting for 7 World Trade Center to fall.”
Fire Department of New York, World Trade Center Task Force Interview – Firefighter Thomas Donato (Interview Date: January 17, 2002), The New York Times, p. 5.
A Danish architect has revealed the designs for the final tower at the World Trade Center in New York.
Seven World Trade Center was completed in 2006 and number four opened in November 2013.
7 World Trade Center
7 World Trade Center is a building in New York City located across from the World Trade Center site in Lower Manhattan.
The name "7 World Trade Center" has referred to two buildings: the original structure, completed in 1987, and the current structure.
The original building was destroyed on September 11, 2001, and replaced with the new 7 World Trade Center, which opened in 2006.
Both buildings were developed by Larry Silverstein, who holds a ground lease for the site from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The original 7 World Trade Center was 47 stories tall, clad in red exterior masonry, and occupied a trapezoidal footprint.
When the building opened in 1987, Silverstein had difficulties attracting tenants.
The new 7 World Trade Center construction began in 2002 and was completed in 2006.
The current 7 World Trade Center's design places emphasis on safety, with a reinforced concrete core, wider stairways, and thicker fireproofing of steel columns.
The original 7 World Trade Center was a 47-story building, designed by Emery Roth & Sons, with a red granite facade.
In March 1987, the building opened, becoming the seventh structure of the World Trade Center.
The final design for 7 World Trade Center was for a much larger building covering a larger footprint than originally planned when the substation was built.
The structural design of 7 World Trade Center included features to allow a larger building than originally planned to be constructed.
A shipping and receiving ramp, which served the entire World Trade Center complex, occupied the eastern quarter of the 7 World Trade Center footprint.
After the World Trade Center bombings of February 26, 1993, New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani decided to situate the emergency command center and associated fuel tanks at 7 World Trade Center.
In all, 7 World Trade Center had 1,868,000 sq ft (174,000 m²) of office space.
Two pedestrian bridges connected the main World Trade Center complex, across Vesey Street, to the third floor of 7 World Trade Center.
The lobby of 7 World Trade Center had three murals by artist Al Held: The Third Circle, Pan North XII, and Vorces VII.
In June 1986, before construction was completed, Silverstein signed Drexel Burnham Lambert as a tenant to lease the entire 7 World Trade Center building for $3 billion over a term of 30 years.
In November 1988, Salomon Brothers withdrew from plans to build a large new complex at Columbus Circle in Midtown and agreed to a 20-year lease for the top 19 floors of 7 World Trade Center.
The unusual task was possible, said Larry Silverstein, because it was designed to allow for "entire portions of floors to be removed without affecting the building's structural integrity, on the assumption that someone might need double-height floors."
At the time of the September 11, 2001 attacks, Salomon Smith Barney was by far the largest tenant in 7 World Trade Center, occupying 1,202,900 sq ft (111,750 m²) (64 percent of the building) which included floors 28–45.
The smallest tenants included the New York City Office of Emergency Management, National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Federal Home Loan Bank, First State Management Group Inc., Provident Financial Management, and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
As the North Tower collapsed on September 11, 2001, heavy debris hit 7 World Trade Center, causing damage to the south face of the building.
After the North Tower collapsed, some firefighters entered 7 World Trade Center to search the building.
A massive fire burned into the afternoon on the 11th and 12th floors of 7 World Trade Center, the flames visible on the east side of the building.
At approximately 2:00 p.m., firefighters noticed a bulge in the southwest corner of 7 World Trade Center between the 10th and 13th floors, a sign that the building was unstable and might collapse.
Around 3:30 pm FDNY Chief Daniel Nigro decided to halt rescue operations, surface removal, and searches along the surface of the debris near 7 World Trade Center and evacuate the area due to concerns for the safety of personnel.
At 5:20:33 p.m. EDT on September 11, 2001, 7 World Trade Center started to collapse, with the crumble of the east mechanical penthouse, while at 5:21:10 p.m. EDT the entire building collapsed completely .
In response to FEMA's concerns, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) was authorized to lead an investigation into the structural failure and collapse of the World Trade Center twin towers and 7 World Trade Center.
The investigation, led by Dr S. Shyam Sunder, drew not only upon in-house technical expertise, but also upon the knowledge of several outside private institutions, including the Structural Engineering Institute of the American Society of Civil Engineers (SEI/ASCE), the Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE), the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), the American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC), the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat (CTBUH), and the Structural Engineers Association of New York (SEAoNY).
The bulk of the investigation of 7 World Trade Center was delayed until after reports were completed on the collapse of the World Trade Center twin towers.
In the meantime, NIST provided a preliminary report about 7 World Trade Center in June 2004, and since then has released occasional updates on the investigation.
According to NIST, the investigation of 7 World Trade Center has been delayed for a number of reasons, including that NIST staff who had been working on 7 World Trade Center were assigned full-time from June 2004 to September 2005 to work on the investigation of the collapse of the twin towers.
In its progress report, NIST released a video and still-photo analysis of 7 World Trade Center before its collapse that appears to indicate a greater degree of structural damage from falling debris than originally assumed by FEMA.
Specifically, NIST's interim report on 7 World Trade Center displays photographs of the southwest facade of the building that show it to have significant damage.
A unique aspect of the design of 7 World Trade Center was that each outer structural column was responsible for supporting 2,000 sq ft (186 m²) of floor space, suggesting that the simultaneous removal of a number of columns severely compromised the structure's integrity.
On August 21, 2008, NIST released its draft report on the causes of the collapse of 7 World Trade Center, beginning a period for public comments.
When 7 World Trade Center collapsed, debris caused substantial damage and contamination to the Borough of Manhattan Community College's Fiterman Hall building, located adjacent at 30 West Broadway, to the extent that the building was not salvageable.
The adjacent Verizon Building, an art deco building constructed in 1926, had extensive damage to its east facade from the collapse of 7 World Trade Center, though it was able to be restored at a cost of US$1.4 billion.
7 World Trade Center housed SEC files relating to numerous Wall Street investigations, as well as other federal investigative files.
The collapse of 7 World Trade Center is remarkable because it was the first known instance of a tall building collapsing primarily as a result of uncontrolled fires.
with Larry Silverstein
AE911Truth needs your help in locating a History Channel TV interview with World Trade Center Building 7 owner Larry Silverstein, in which he admitted point-blank that the building was purposely demolished on September 11, 2001.
All About 7 World Trade Center
7 World Trade Center is a building in the World Trade Center complex in Lower Manhattan, New York City
The original structure was completed in 1987 and was destroyed in the September 11 attacks
Both buildings were developed by Larry Silverstein, who holds a ground lease for the site from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
When the building opened in 1987, Silverstein had difficulties attracting tenants
The collapse made the old 7 World Trade Center the first tall building known to have collapsed primarily due to uncontrolled fires, and the first and only steel skyscraper in the world to have collapsed due to fire.
Construction of the new Trade Center began in 2002 and was completed in 2006
The building is tall (plus one underground floor), making it the 28th-tallest in New York
The building was the first commercial office building in New York City to receive the U.S
Building 7 was a 47-story skyscraper and was part of the World Trade Center complex.
It collapsed at 5:21:10 pm on September 11, 2001.
Port Authority of New York & New Jersey
Concerns included the costs of these changes, "and when that happens, that's because they're not really convinced of the benefits, and I think that's because there was a lack of consensus over the results of the investigation," notes Guy Nordenson, a Princeton professor of architecture and structural engineering who runs a structural engineering firm in New York and was not involved in the NIST investigation.
So far, New York City has already made significant changes in response to NIST recommendations, Sunder notes, as have many new projects in the United States, such as One World Trade Center, the lead building of the new World Trade Center complex.
Building 7 was a 47-story skyscraper and was part of the World Trade Center complex.
It collapsed at 5:20 pm on September 11, 2001.
7 World Trade Center
7 World Trade Center was a building in New York City that was destroyed on 9/11.
7 World Trade Center
The 52-story, 1.7-million-square-foot 7 World Trade Center is a benchmark of innovative design, safety, and sustainability.
7 WTC has drawn a diverse roster of tenants, including Moody's Corporation, New York Academy of Sciences, Mansueto Ventures, MSCI, and WilmerHale.
7 World Trade Center combines a one-of-a-kind work environment with a one-of-a-kind commitment to environmental responsibility.
It is New York's first LEED-Gold certified office building.
