Campbells Soup Cans

November 2012: Andy Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup Cans, 1962
In the 50 years since they first went on display, Andy Warhol’s 32 Campbell’s Soup Cans have become a canonical symbol of American Pop Art.
Warhol, an American commercial illustrator from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania turned fine artist, author, publisher, painter, and film director, first showed the work on July 9, 1962 in the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles, California.
Even his autobiographical 1975 “The Philosophy of Andy Warhol” is “a parody of personal revelation,” full of hollow banality, constantly reasserting the author’s own “nothingness.”
Works like Green Coca-Cola Bottles (1962, above) and Brillo Boxes (1964) pushed the public to think about material consumption, while his reproductions of news articles depicting horrific car accidents and portraits of tragic celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe, Liz Taylor, and Elvis Presley made us think about our relationship to news and entertainment, and what that relationship said about us as a society.
And he [Andy Warhol] said, 'No, I'm just too depressed.'
Often viewed as Andy Warhol's signature image, this Campbell's Soup can image was a springboard not only for Andy Warhol's career but also for the Pop Art movement.
Andy Warhol debuted his Campbell's Soup Can originals at Ferus, a Los Angeles gallery, in the summer of 1962.
There were 32 (thirty-two) canvases sized 20 inches high by 16 inches wide.
The art work that Andy Warhol created with these soup cans was a direct affront to the abstract expressionism of the day.
The Appeal of Andy Warhol Never Gets Old
When thinking of Andy Warhol, it is impossible not to conjure up images of the infamous Campbell’s soup cans.
For the first time ever at MoMA, the soup cans are displayed in a line (rather than a grid), echoing the manner in which Warhol exhibited them at the LA-based Ferus Gallery in 1962.
The individual paintings were produced by a printmaking method, a semi-mechanized screen printing process that uses a non-traditional painterly style.
The soup cans are the prime example of a Pop cultural movement becoming an art historical– one could go as far as to say that their initial display in 1962 was the birth of Pop Art.
Warhol’s combination of a semi-mechanized process, non-painterly style and commercial subject initially caused offense, as the work’s  blatantly mundane commercialism represented a direct offense to the technique and philosophy of abstract expressionism.
Andy Warhol
Andy Warhol
Minneapolis, Locksley Shea Gallery, Andy Warhol, circa 1965
Rainer Crone, Andy Warhol, New York 1970, p. 305, no. 512 (text)
Rainer Crone, Andy Warhol: Das Bildnerische Werk Andy Warhols, Berlin 1976, n.p., no. 861 (text)
George Frei and Neil Printz, Eds., The Andy Warhol Catalogue Raisonné: Paintings and Sculptures, Volume 2B, 1964-1969, New York 2004, p. 192, no. 1845, illustrated in colour
Instantly recognisable, fiercely conceptual, charged with art historical significance, and consummately rare, Large Campbell’s Soup Can is the archetypal Andy Warhol artwork.
Moreover, there was a suggestion that the soup held some personal significance for the artist, some shred of childhood memory: “Many an afternoon at lunchtime Mom would open a can of Campbell’s for me, because that’s all we could afford, I love it to this day” (Andy Warhol quoted in: Victor Bockris, The Life and Death of Andy Warhol, London 1998, p. 144).
Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup series was first displayed at Walter Hopps and Irving Blum’s Ferus Gallery, in Los Angeles, in July 1962.
He exhibited 32 canvases, each measuring 20 by 16 inches: one for each flavour of soup manufactured by the food conglomerate at that time.
It was Warhol himself who best summed up his undying devotion to this subject matter: “I should have just done the Campbell’s Soups and kept on doing them” (Andy Warhol quoted in: Annette Michelson, Ed., Andy Warhol, Cambridge, Massachusetts 2001, p. 124).
Apparently there's Andy Warhol Campell's soup cans on sale at Target in honor of his work's 50th anniversary!
My reference was Mr Andy Warhol and his 32 Campbell's Soup Cans work, produced in 1962.
Those individual paintings were made by a printmaking method — the semi-mechanized screen printing process, using a non-painterly style.
Iconic Andy Warhol paintings 'disappear' after being loaned out by museum
Two famous works of art by Andy Warhol have vanished while on loan from a modern art museum in Eastern Europe.
The pop artist's paintings were loaned to an individual by the Andy Warhol Museum of the Modern Art in Medzilaborce, Slovakia, but he then vanished.
Warhol produced 32 Campbell's Soup Cans in 1962 to illustrate one of each of the canned soup varieties the company offered at the time.
The Andy Warhol Museum of the Modern Art in town of Medzilaborce is the museum with the second largest collection of Warhol’s artworks worldwide after Pittsburg’s Warhol museum.
“Campbell’s soup cans”  32 20” x 16” silk-screen oil paintings, each of a different variety (flavor) of Campbell’s soup, first presented in Los Angeles on 9th July 1962 (date considered the beginning of Pop Art) and now on permanent exhibition at the MOMA.
c) A work of art in touch with the present: it  the spirit of 60s America in its simplicity and in the way it  a very material world.
It  certain that he  famous because of pop art and he  today one of the most important and popular artists.
Some of the "Campbell's Soup Cans" -- 1962 art by #AndyWarhol, on display at @MuseumModernArt in @I_LOVE_NY
Art Review: Andy Warhol’s Soup Cans at MoMA
Andy Warhol's Soup Cans at MoMA, On View Now Through Oct. 18, 2015
In 1962, a commercial illustrator and an aspiring artist named Andy Warhol held his first solo painting exhibition at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles.
Today, that exhibition is remembered for two reasons: first, a series of 32 paintings of Campbell's soup cans was exhibited for the first time, which marked the beginning of the rise of Warhol as the foremost artist of his time; and second, it is remembered as the first exhibition of what would later be labeled "pop art".
Campbell's Soup Cans, or 32 Campbell's Soup Cans as it is sometimes referred to as, consists of 32 canvases, each measuring 20 inches (height) by 16 inches (width) and bearing a painting of a Campbell Soup can.
The paintings did not only establish Warhol as an international artist; they also helped usher in pop art as a major art form in the United States.
