Chetro Ketl

Architecture and Dendrochronology of Chetro Ketl, Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
Chetro Ketl is one of the largest ruins in Chaco Culture National Historical Park, New Mexico.
The visible architecture of Chetro Ketl dates from the early eleventh to the early twelfth centuries A. D.
Chetro Ketl, at its largest, had between 200 and 225 ground-floor rooms, and a total of 450 to 550 rooms on all stories.
Chetro Ketl is one of the central group of Chacoan ruins (Figure I: 1), 0.4 miles east of Pueblo Bonito.
Low walls may have run between Chetro Ketl and Pueblo Bonito, forming a possible compound.
For over 1300', from Talus Unit #1 (just west of Chetro Ketl) to the head of the rincon behind the ruin, this south -facing cliff served as the back wall for numerous structures.
Just to the west of, and perhaps contiguous with Chetro Ketl, is a smaller square building, similar in plan to the "McElmo Phase" sites (Vivian and Mathews 1965).
Southeast of Chetro Ketl, across a recently rechanneled gully, lies a large oval mound.
-- The Wesley Bradfield photographic record of excavations at Chetro Ketl 1920-21.
-- Notes on the excavation of Kiva 11 (Kiva F) at Chetro Ketl in 1920 and the disposition of artifacts by K.M. Chapman.
Additionally, he spent two seasons excavating at Chetro Ketl and published overviews of this work in Art and Archaeology.
The circular masonry “great bowls” in front of Pueblo Bonito and Chetro Ketl attracted the attention of early canyon excavators, such as Judd and Hewett.
The Changing Faces of Chetro Ketl
Chetro Ketl was either the largest or the second largest building in Chaco, after Pueblo Bonito.
Some archaeologists thought Bonito bigger; others favored Chetro Ketl.
Its construction (990 to 1115) began almost a century later than Pueblo Bonito’s, but Chetro Ketl soon rivaled its older neighbor as the architectural focus of “downtown” Chaco.
This Park is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, with more than 4,000 prehistoric archeological sites belonging to the Hopi and Pueblo people.
For example, Chetro Ketl, an Ancestral Puebloan great house and archeological site It’s a giant structure, spanning over 3 acres, including 400 rooms.
Construction on Chetro Ketl began c.?
Chetro Ketl Ruins.
Chetro Ketl.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park, New Mexico.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park, New Mexico.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park, located north and west of Albuquerque, contains eighteen square miles of ruins, including major and minor building sites and miles of straight ceremonial ways or roads.
Other ruins at Chaco Canyon include Chetro Ketl, Casa Rinconada, and Pueblo del Arroyo.
The map of the Chaco Culture National Historical Park is shown above.
Chetro Ketl, a name which Carravahal said means Rain Pueblo.
The large kiva at Chetro Ketl is shown above.
In 1980 the National Monument was re-designated as the Chaco Culture National Historical Park.
José Antonio Vizcarra (or Viscarra) was a Mexican soldier who served as Governor of New Mexico from 1822 to 1823.
José Antonio Vizcarra
José Antonio Vizcarra was the son of Don Juan José Viscarra and...
months, when he was succeeded in November 1822 by Colonel José Antonio Vizcarra.
holding office for just five months, when he was succeeded by Colonel José Antonio Vizcarra.
Chetro Ketl
was rediscovered in 1823 by the Mexican governor of New Mexico, José Antonio Vizcarra, and in 1849 Lieutenant James Simpson of the United States Army
He might have also guided José Antonio Vizcarra during his 1823 campaign against the Navajo people, during which Vizcarra
Melgares's successor, Governor José Antonio Vizcarra met Navajo leaders at Paguate on 12 February 1823.
Located near the center of a cluster of great and small houses sometimes referred to as “Downtown Chaco,” the surrounding great houses include Chetro Ketl to the east, Pueblo del Arroyo to the west, Kin Kletso to the northwest, Kin Sabe to the southwest, and Casa Rinconada to the south.
Although the footprint of Pueblo Bonito is slightly smaller in area than Chetro Ketl, this D-shaped great house is the biggest of all Chacoan great houses with 32 kivas, 3 great kivas, and over 350 ground-floor rooms.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Some still standing, some remain only as foundation ruins, the park is said to contain 2,400 identified archeological sites, few of them have currently been excavated.
Chetro Ketl
Chaco Culture National Historical Park Loop Rd.
Chetro Ketl is a first-order Chacoan great house and a key structure in “Downtown Chaco.”
The first formal archaeological fieldwork at Chetro Ketl was undertaken by Edgar Hewett, who excavated roughly two-thirds of its rooms in 1920–1921 and 1929–1937; between 200 and 225 ground floor rooms are presently visible.
Chetro Ketl shares with Pueblo Bonito a D-shape plan, precise north-south orientation, and core-and-veneer masonry construction.
Chetro Ketl was begun later and completed in less time (circa 990–1115) than Pueblo Bonito.
The most unusual, and distinctive, feature of Chetro Ketl is the colonnade of masonry piers that fronts the central pavilion on the plaza.
The Architecture and Dendrochronology of Chetro Ketl.
“The Changing Faces of Chetro Ketl.”
"Chetro Ketl" in SAH Archipedia, eds.
In 1901, Wetherill, who had worked for the Hyde family in Chaco Canyon, homesteaded land that included Pueblo Bonito, Pueblo Del Arroyo, and Chetro Ketl.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park - History - Excavation and Protection
... The first documented trip through Chaco Canyon was an 1823 expedition led by New Mexican governor José Antonio Vizcarra ... He noted several large ruins in the canyon ... The trader Josiah Gregg wrote about the ruins of Chaco Canyon, referring in 1832 to Pueblo Bonito as "built of fine-grit sandstone" ...
Chetro Ketl - Great House of the Anasazi in Chaco Canyon
Chetro Ketl, Great House Site in Chaco Canyon.
Chetro Ketl (pronounced "Chet-row Kettle") is the second most famous Anasazi (Ancestral Pueblo) great house site in the Chaco Canyon National Park of New Mexico in the southwestern United States.
The site lies half a mile east of Pueblo Bonito and it is the largest great house site in the canyon, even if it has “only” about 400 multi-storied rooms, 100 less than Pueblo Bonito.
Constructions at Chetro Ketl date to the mid-10th century AD, as do the majority of the other great house sites in Chaco Canyon.
Tree-Ring Dating at Chetro Ketl
Chetro Ketl played an important role in the development of the tree ring dating sequence (dendrochronology) at Chaco Canyon.
Chetro Ketl, in fact, is among the best dated ruin of the canyon.
At Chetro Ketl, archaeologist Florence Hawley took samples of wood from every element available, not just the beams.
From Hawley's study, it appears that the history of Chetro Ketl can be divided into at least three main periods:
From AD 945 to AD 1030: this long period, unfortunately also the least known so far, is when first constructions at Chetro Ketl began.
From AD 1030 to 1090: this is the greatest period of constructions at Chetro Ketl, and in general in Chaco Canyon.
From AD 1090 to 1116: this is a period of decline for Chetro Ketl.
Architecture at Chetro Ketl
Chetro Ketl presents the typical D-shape of many great house sites.
The most atypical construction of Chetro Ketl is a masonry colonnade along the building walls, facing the plaza.
Stone disks to support and balance the posts necessary to sustain the building's roof were found during the excavations of Chetro Ketl.
Outside the walls of the site, other elements show the importance of Chetro Ketl in the Chaco canyon region.
Artifacts and Ritual at Chetro Ketl
In Chaco Canyon great house sites, burials of any kind are rare, but exotic goods found in other contexts have suggested the presence of a leadership living in sites such as Pueblo Bonito and Chetro Ketl.
In the 1920s, the excavation of Room 93 in Chetro Ketl produced almost 200 artifacts.
A further example of objects found at Chetro Ketl comes from some of the niches along the walls of one of the great kivas.
Chetro Ketl
The Great House is a D-shaped structure —— its east wall is 280ft long and the north wall is more than 450ft.
Chetro Ketl
The trail through Chetro Ketl is ½ mile, roundtrip.
When you visit Chetro Ketl, you can use the trail guide to help you recognize characteristics of Chacoan architecture--features that are both typical and unique.
Chetro Ketl is the second largest Chacoan great house.
Chetro Ketl from the mesa top
Chetro Ketl at night
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
19th Century exploration pushed further into northeastern New Mexico; José Antonio Vizcarra describes a trip down Chaco Canyon in 1823 during which he observed that some of the canyon land was good for grazing livestock, while some could be used for dry farming.
He obtained names for them from the Indian and Mexican guides with his party: Pueblo Pintado, Una Vida, Hungo Pavi, Chetro Ketl, Pueblo Bonito, Pueblo del Arroyo and Peñasco Blanco, names familiar to all students of Chacoan culture.
Edgar L. Hewett, in charge of the Chaco field school, had in 1921 made some limited excavations at Chetro Ketl; now he continued excavations at the same site under his own program jointly run by the School of American Research and the University of New Mexico.
Hewett's program excavated less than half of the estimated 500 rooms in Chetro Ketl.
They discovered remains of an earlier structure beneath the great house, but were unable to determine if it was the beginning of the existing building or a community that had been abandoned before construction of Chetro Ketl began.
However, in places they found almost two stories of construction beneath the original Chetro Ketl structure.
Among the rooms excavated in the D-shaped structure were two great kivas, one 60 feet in diameter, with niches, each containing a ritual offering or religious paraphernalia.
Significant research was done by Florence M. Hawley, who worked with A.E. Douglass, the father of dendrochronology, in dating samples of wood from all parts of Chetro Ketl.
Hawley's work made Chetro Ketl the best dated ruin in Chaco Canyon.
Using the dates obtained from tests on her specimens of wood, Hawley was able to analyze the stratrigraphy of the huge pile of refuse in front of Chetro Ketl, to date the pottery found there, and compare it with pottery found in neighboring settlements.
Concentrating first on Pueblo Bonito and Chetro Ketl, water diversion, wall stabilization and replacement of previous unsuccessful stabilization materials such as cement was implemented.
Flooding at Chetro Ketl caused sections of the wall of a partially open first story room to weaken.
During the middle and late 800s, the great houses of Pueblo Bonito, Una Vida, and Peñasco Blanco were constructed, followed by Hungo Pavi, Chetro Ketl, Pueblo Alto, and others.
While investigating Wetherill's land claim, federal land agent Samuel J. Holsinger observed the physical setting of the canyon and its sites, its prehistoric road segments, the stairways above Chetro Ketl, and its prehistoric dams and irrigation systems.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park is now managed by the National Park Service, a federal agency within the Department of the Interior.
