Borobudur

Entry fees were around 350,000 Indonesian rupees per head.
This 9th century Mahayana Buddhist temple consists of nine stacked platforms (six square & three circular) topped by a central dome & is decorated with 2700 bas-relief panels & 504 Buddha statues.
Central dome is surrounded by 72 Buddha statues inside the perforated stupas.
It is designed in Buddhist architecture with major influences of Indian Gupta art and indigenous Indonesian traditional art.
Temple is also used as a place for pilgrimage & Buddhist in Indonesia come here every year celebrating “Vesak”.
This huge monument is located in a green valley and consists of nine stacked platforms, six square and three circular, topped by a central dome.
Borobudur is a Buddhist candi in Magelang, Java, consisting of six square platforms surmounted by three circular platforms, atop which are 72 small stupas surrounding a large central stupa.
The largest Buddhist temple in the world is Borobudur, near Yogyakarta, central Java, Indonesia, built between AD 750 and 842.
Entry fees were around 350,000 Indonesian rupees per head.
This 9th century Mahayana Buddhist temple consists of nine stacked platforms (six square & three circular) topped by a central dome & is decorated with 2700 bas-relief panels & 504 Buddha statues.
Central dome is surrounded by 72 Buddha statues inside the perforated stupas.
It is designed in Buddhist architecture with major influences of Indian Gupta art and indigenous Indonesian traditional art.
Temple is also used as a place for pilgrimage & Buddhist in Indonesia come here every year celebrating “Vesak”.
Country: Indonesia
Province: Central Java
The Borobudur Temple Compounds is a ninth-century Mahayana Buddhist monument.
The monument contains six square platforms with three circular platforms on top.
It has 2,672 relief panels that are decorated and a total of 504 Buddhist statues.
In 1814 Native Indonesians enlightened Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, the ruler of Java, of the Borobudur Temples location.
#enjoy #happymoment #borobudur #triptoyogya @ Borobudur Temple, Java Island, Indonesia.
Indonesia tightens security at world's largest Buddhist temple after ISIS threat
Indonesian police have been put on alert at the Borobudur Temple after a threat against the world’s biggest Buddhist temple and UNESCO World heritage Site was made on Facebook by Islamic State supporters.
Tightening security around Borobudur was not the only measure taken, as police in Central Java province also begun thoroughly searching through data from the Internet for possible clues about the plan, National Police spokesman Ronny F. Sompie told the Jakarta Post on Friday.
“The Central Java Police chief has ordered an investigation into the threat and we expect that there will be cooperation with the temple’s security personnel and the Indonesian Military [TNI] to safeguard the temple from any possible damage,” he said in the capital city of Jakarta.
“We’ve increased the number of security officers and have coordinated with PT Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur [TWCB, which manages tourism activities at the temple] and the local police,” he said on Friday in Magelang.
The Indonesian army has also been involved.
Built in Central Java in the IX century, Borobudur is known as the largest and one of the most important Buddhist monuments in the world.
With over 500 Buddha statues, it serves not only as a key tourist attraction in Indonesia, but also as a pilgrimage site for Mahayana Buddhists from all over the world.
The magnificent ancient Buddhist Temple of Borobudur
Indonesia is the country with the largest Muslim population in the world.
One of the most iconic monuments attesting to this pre-Islamic era is the Borobudur Temple Compound in the Kedu Valley, which is situated on the southern part of Central Java.
This temple was built as a Mahayana Buddhist temple around the8th and 9 th century A.D. by the Sailendra dynasty.
In 1948, the plight of Borobudur came to the attention of the newly formed Republic of Indonesia.
Two decades later, the “Save Borobudur” campaign was launched through the Indonesian government and UNESCO.
The fact that this incredible Buddhist monument continues to be treasured and protected in a predominantly Muslim country, is testament to its significant value as a cultural and historical icon of Indonesia.
Largest Buddhist Temple.
Borobuur, Indonesia.
It was built in three tiers: a pyramidal base with five concentric square terraces, the trunk of a cone with three circular platforms and, at the top, a monumental stupa.
The monument is located in the Kedu Valley, in the southern part of Central Java, at the centre of the island of Java, Indonesia.
The main temple is a stupa built in three tiers around a hill which was a natural centre: a pyramidal base with five concentric square terraces, the trunk of a cone with three circular platforms and, at the top, a monumental stupa.
At Borobudur Temple, the kamadhatu is represented by the base, the rupadhatu by the five square terraces, and the arupadhatu by the three circular platforms as well as the big stupa.
Criterion (ii): Borobudur Temple Compounds is an outstanding example of Indonesia’s art and architecture from between the early 8th and late 9th centuries that exerted considerable influence on an architectural revival between the mid-13th and early 16th centuries.
The protection of the property is performed under Indonesian Law No. 11/2010 concerning Cultural Heritage and its surrounding cultural landscape.
Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur under the Ministry of Enterprises, and of the local governments (Magelang Regency and Central Java Province).
The community development related to economical sector (small enterprises that produce traditional handicrafts, culinaries, etc) have already being conducted by the municipalities of Magelang Regency and Central Java Province.
On Being Indonesian: Heritage Tourism at Borobudur Temple
This is because this report explores the notion of Indonesian identity, of which culture is inextricably linked.
This is true for Indonesia where the government has placed an emphasis on regional, not ethnic, differentiation.
The Indonesian government have filtered out what they believe to be suitable to include in the construction of both ethnic and national images (Schiller & Martin-Schillor 1997).
This report draws on the study, characterising the complexity of Indonesian identity within the context of a UNESCO World Heritage site.
It comments on the multiple identities that have been created to unite the multiple cultures and languages from across the archipelago under the concept of Indonesia.
This concept of Indonesia is then developed further to market the country for tourism purposes.
This research study focused on one site in Indonesia.
Indonesia is an archipelago of over 17,000 islands situated in Southeast Asia.
Indonesia is classified by the World Bank as a lower middle income country (World Bank 2010).
Tourism provides an important source of income within Indonesia’s economy.
It is situated 42 kilometres northwest of Yogyakarta in Central Java, rising out of the palm trees, villages and field of rice and sugar cane.
Dating back to the 8th century, Borobudur is a large Buddhist monument consisting of six square terraces with intricately carved narrative panels, topped by three circular terraces with 72 Buddhas sat in individual latticed stupas (Boccardi, Brroks, & Gurang 2006;Mus & MacDonald 1998).
In addition, encouraging local community involvement in the development process continues to be a source of conflict between the provincial Central Javanese Government, UNESCO and the local communities (Black & Wall 2001).
Domestic tourists are defined as Indonesians who do not live in the local Yogyakarta area, but live in other Indonesian provinces.
International tourists have been defined as tourists who are not Indonesian citizens and do not reside in Indonesia.
“I don’t really see it [Borobudur] as being part of my own heritage, maybe Indonesian history.
Development prospects for countries that have an ethnically diverse society, such as Indonesia, often lie in tourism.
One of the problems faced by the Indonesian government is the ongoing promotion of a national identity under the slogan ‘Unity in diversity’.
The promotion of Indonesia as a tourist site results in a situation where the government shapes and controls the tourist encounter (Adams 2003;Picard & Wood 1997).
The Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board (ITPB) was created in 1989 to undertake the task of promoting Indonesian and Indonesian products both internationally and domestically (Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism 2007;Tan, McCahon, & Miller 2002).
The problem with this approach was the creation of multiple Indonesian identities at both the global and local level.
For international tourists, Indonesia is marketed as an exotic holiday location compared to the educational ‘visit your heritage’ marketing approach is used for domestic tourists.
Designated as a cultural rather than religious site by the Indonesian government (Nuriyanti 1999), the conservation of a World Heritage site is a responsibility shared between the international, national and local communities.
Furthermore, these images conflict with notions of what it is to be Indonesian.
As a result Indonesia becomes a constantly evolving idea that is open to the influence of ideas from new governments that come into power.
In attempting to explore how Borobudur fits into the construct of Indonesian identity, it was found that Indonesia itself is a construction with several identities being played out simultaneously at the global and local level.
Borobudur itself has become assimilated and utilised into the part of Indonesian identity that has been carefully constructed by the state, other government stakeholders and UNESCO.
Thus, continuing the evolutionary process in order to meet the ongoing needs of creating both national Indonesian and marketing identities.
Tourism has played an important role within Indonesia’s economic development.
Indonesia is a country that is very rich in natural attractions and for that reason, there are many places you can visit during your stay in Indonesia.
This 123-meter long and 123-meter wide Buddhist temple contains nine stacked platforms with a dome at the top.
He explained that there were two main kinds, Theravada and Mahayana, and that this monastery followed the teachings of Theravada.
After visiting the monastery, we visited Borobudur Temple, which is a Mahayana Buddhist temple from the 9th Century.
For a few years after that, UNESCO and the Indonesian government started a project to restore the temple.
Buddha statue in open stupa in Borobudur, or Barabudur, temple Jogjakarta, Java, Indonesia at sunrise.
It is a 9th-century Mahayana temple and the biggest Buddhist Temple in Indonesia.
Indonesian World Heritage Sites
Indonesia, an archipelago nation of no less than 17,508 islands stretched over 5,200 kilometers in equator between Australia and Asia (Drakeley, 2005), has been inhabited over millennia.
Civilizations had been arisen and fallen, leaving numerous of legacies within the nowadays Indonesia.
The site is located in Muntilan Village in Magelang regency, about 42 km from Yogyakarta city in Central Java, consists of three monuments: namely the Borobudur Temple and two smaller temples, Pawon and Mendut, situated to the east on a straight axis respectively 1,15 and 3 kilometers away to the main monument (PT.
It represents an outstanding example of Indonesia’s art and architecture, blending the idea of indigenous ancestor worship and the Buddhist concept of attaining Nirvana (UNESCO, 2013a).
The Borobudur Temple covers an enormous area, measuring 123 x 123 meters and decorated with 2,672 relief panels and 504 Buddha statues (MTCE, 2012).
Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur, Prambanan dan Ratu Boko (under Ministry of Enterprises) and the local governments (Magelang Regency and Central Java Province).
Publication is also essential to promote the site and also celebrity endorsement as another used strategy, named from Maria Sharapova (Projecting Indonesia, 2013) and Richard Gere (Wahyuni, 2011) who brought up an idea to create a movie about Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles who was credited for the re-discovery of the temple in 1814.
The History of Indonesia [online].
Projecting Indonesia, 2013.
Projecting Indonesia.
Local attitudes towards conservation and tourism around Komodo National Park, Indonesia.
Wonderful Indonesia, 2010.
Wonderful Indonesia, 2012.
Guinness World Record declares Borobudur Single Largest Buddhist Temple in the World [online].
Wonderful Indonesia, 2013.
Borobudur is a Buddhist stupa and temple complex in Central Java, Indonesia dating from the 8th century, and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
As well as being the single most popular tourist attraction in modern day Indonesia, Borobudur has resumed its role as an important place of worship and pilgrimage for Indonesian Buddhists.
Another date in the Indonesian calendar to consider is that of Idul Fitri and up to a week after.
The public buses to Borobudur from Yogyakarta are aimed mostly at Indonesian visitors, and only a few tourists venture aboard.
Buses run regularly from Magelang to Borobudur via Muntilan and are widely advertised there.
To get from or to the Hindu temples at Prambanan, take a Yogyakarta bus and get down at Jombor Terminal (90 min, Rp 15,000 for foreigners, Rp 7,000 for Indonesians).
Most of the route is on a well-maintained (for Indonesia) four-lane (in many places) highway, and there are frequent bus services (see above).
The nearest stations are in Yogyakarta which is the major rail hub of Central Java.
USD 20 / Rp 230,000 for adult non-Indonesians.
US $11/Rp 104,000 for non-Indonesian registered students (proof, e.g. ISIC, is required).
Rp 15,000 on weekdays and Rp 17,500 at weekends for Indonesian adults or foreign holders of an Indonesian work permit or KITAS.
Borobudur consists of six square platforms topped by three circular platforms, and is decorated with no less than 2,672 relief panels and 504 Buddha statues of various types.
The main dome, located at the centre of the top platform, is surrounded by 72 Buddha statues seated inside perforated stupas.
The whole monument is constructed from dark grey andesite stone, and so synonymous has this become with Borobudur and other temples on the Kedu Plain, that Indonesian for the material is simply batu candi (temple stone).
The bulk of the structure consists of six square terraces connected by steep staircases.
Above the square terraces, the structure opens up to reveal the final three circular terraces.
However, the Manohara Hotel (see Sleep) runs a daily Borobudur Sunrise Tour for Rp 320,000 for foreigners (Rp 185,000 if you are a hotel guest) and Rp 220,000 for Indonesians, which gets you a flashlight and a lift up to the temple gate at 4:30AM.
He surmised that these ships may have been a part of a famous shipping route — the Cinnamon Route — that linked Indonesia to Africa many centuries earlier.
Perhaps the most interesting exhibitions about this are those of the law of karma reliefs, with explanatory comments, and the photo gallery of late 19th-century shots of the complex before it was restored.
Between Yogyakarta and Magelang lies the volcanic Kedu Plain.
It was first discovered in 1834 and holds the distinction of being the first ancient monument in the whole of Indonesia to be restored (from 1897).
Should you be in need of cash, there is a Bank Negara Indonesia (BNI) ATM close to the main park entrance.
Muntilan is a market town on the main route from Yogyakarta to Magelang.
When leaving Borobudure, Muntilan is 13–14 km (8.5 mi) back towards Yogyakarta on the main road (Jalan Magelang).
As a typical market town in Central Java, it is worth walking along the main street to have a sense of where tourism has not taken over completely, as most tourists rush through, a significant number of adjacent villages and areas treat this as their market town, and it is possible to see the businesses and people who rely on Javanese custom, rather than tourist.
In most cases though, the food stores will still provide tourist food, rather than what the local eats, you would need a javanese or Indonesian friend or guide to specify you want to eat local.
Muntilan is also a significant roman catholic heritage site, being the location of the Van Lith mission in the nineteenth century, it is also the place where senior members of the Jesuits who served in Yogyakarta and Central Java are buried.
The bus station area is home to a multitude of hawker stalls selling standard Indonesian street food and all manner of drinks.
Manohara Restaurant, inside the grounds of the hotel of the same name, serves up standard Indonesian fare while offering beautiful views of Borobudur.
The vast majority of visitors stay in Yogyakarta and a few in Magelang.
Owing to the site's popularity with tourists prices are, by Indonesian standards, somewhat inflated for what you get.
Popular amongst backpackers and offers the usual Indonesian budget set-up.
Good, cheap Indonesian food available until 21:00.
Very popular with Indonesian families and the walls are thin, so it can get noisy.
Ning Tidar Hotel, Jl Purworejo-Magelang KM 5, Magelang (about 6 km (3.7 mi) from Borobudur), ☎ +62 293 314316, e-mail: info@ningtidar.com.
Plataran Borobudur (Plataran Borobudur Resort and Spa in Borobudur), Dusun Tanjungan, Borobudur, Magelang, Central Java 56553, Indonesia (1.5 km from Borobudur area (You can reach the temple area in less then 5 minutes)), ☎ +62 293 788 888, fax: +62 293 788 699, e-mail: info@plataranborobudur.com.
The Dieng Plateau is a volcanic area in the highlands of Central Java with the oldest standing temples in Indonesia, pre-dating Borobudur by some 100 years.
