Castle

Substantial earthworks around the ruins of the castle (still only partially explored) indicate there were earlier buildings on the site, but de Aldeburgh made a decision to demolish and replace whatever was there with something brand new – fore-shadowing Gawthorpe Hall and Harewood House some 400 years later.
Harewood Castle was designed to strike a balance between security and comfort: a “mixture of convenience and magnificence”, more accurately described as a fortified Tower House than a castle.
The mullioned and transomed window frames, for example, are fine examples of 14th century mason’s skills and though the massively thick walls would have made the castle eminently defensible, they also contained an elaborate network of internal walkways, stairs and flues.
They and their husbands Sir William Ryther and Sir Richard Redmayne shared occupation of the castle, either simultaneously or in a 14th century version of time-share, an arrangement the two families continued for more than 200 years.
By 1657, when the amalgamated Harewood and Gawthorpe estates were bought by Sir John Cutler, the castle was falling down and uninhabitable.
When it comes to structures that are both majestic and well-fortified, the classic European castle is the pinnacle of design.
Across the ages castles changed, developed, and eventually fell out of use, but they still command the fascination of our culture.
The castles he built allowed the Norman lords to retreat to safety when threatened by English rebellion.
Troops were summoned to, organized around, and deployed from castles.
In this way castles served both offensive and defensive roles in military operations.
Not limited to military purposes, castles also served as offices from which the lord would administer control over his fiefdom.
That is to say, the lord of the land would hold court in his castle.
In this way castles served as important social centers in medieval England.
Built on prominent sites overlooking the surrounding areas, castles constantly loomed in the background of many peasants' lives and served as a daily reminder of the lord's strength.
The first castles constructed in England were made from earth and timber.
Since these castles were constructed from wood, they were highly susceptible to attacks by fire.
Wooden castles were gradually replaced by stone, which greatly increased the strength of these fortifications; however, being made from stone did not make these castles entirely fireproof.
Attackers could hurl flaming objects into the castle through the windows or ignite the wooden doors.
Castles served many purposes during the Middle Ages.
In response to these attacks, castle defenses were updated and improved.
These were small holes in the castle, large enough for an arrow to fit through, which allowed defenders to fire from nearly invulnerable positions.
These towers were connected to the castle by wooden bridges, so that if one tower fell, the rest of the castle was still easy to defend.
Multiple rings of castle walls were constructed, so that even if attackers made it past one wall, they would be caught on a killing ground between inner and outer walls.
Advances such as these greatly increased the defense of castles.
The demise of castles can ultimately be attributed to gunpowder.
During the 15th century, artillery became powerful enough to break through stone walls.
This greatly undermined the military role of castles.
Though castles no longer serve their original purposes, remaining castles receive millions of visitors each year from those who wish to experience these majestic vestiges of a time long passed.
Which of the following is not a function of castles as expressed in the text?
It explains why castles were first built in England and the military purposes they served.
It details all of the purposes that English castles served.
Which best explains why the original castles were first made from earth and timber?
It takes a lot more time and energy to build a stone castle.
It did not occur to people to build castles out of stone.
c. People did not realize how weak wooden castles would be against fire.
d. Wooden castles were prettier than dirty stone castles.
Which best explains why wooden castles were converted to stone castles.
a. Wooden castles take a long time to build.
b. Wooden castles are uncomfortable.
c. Stone castles offer better defense.
d. Stone castles stay cooler in the summer.
Which is not described in the text as an improvement in castle defenses?
a. Towers attached to the main castle by wooden bridges
b. Deep ditches dug around the castle walls and filled with water
c. Multiple castle walls providing layers of defenses
Which best explains how gunpowder ended the role of traditional castles?
a. Wars were fought with guns and hiding in castles was no longer necessary.
b. Artillery forts with large cannons became more stylish than traditional castles.
c. Defending castles grew difficult, since attackers could just shoot castle defenders.
d. Cannons were able to knock down stone walls, so castles offered little protection.
b. William the Conqueror built the first castles in England.
It is unfortunate that castles no longer serve their original purposes.
d. Castles were used as offices of administration during the Middle Ages.
This is when castles appeared.
Although a castle was a private residence a lord still had responsibility to protect his people.
Castles then were made of stone which where way more fortified and those are the castles that are still here today.
What they were made off Stone- the main part of of the castles
Brick- some accessories in the castles are brick
Wood-Norman and Bailey castles were just made of wood
Glass-windows in the castle Castles are Built by a Lord or a Noble.
Famous Castle wars Guards on a Castle Advantage to castle war The keep is a great tower that is usually the highest and most strongly defended part of the castle.
The keep is often the strongest part of the castle and was the last place of refuge if the outer defenses fall.
Castle Vs. Palace Moats Who ruled the castles A lord
A very wealthy knight History of the Castle Who made Castles What are Castles Castles are fortified structures that were built in Europe during Medieval times.
A castle is usually a fortified residence of a lord or noble.
A crusader castle
and the Kurds Guards are posted almost everywhere in a castle.
The most heavilly guarded spot is the keep Castles are fortified structures that are ruled by a lord or a noble.
This is like a Palace which is also ruled by a lord or a noble, but the difference is a castle is fortified and built to protect and be strong.
While a palace is built for luxery and is not fortified like a castle.
It is used to stop things such as siege towers from reaching the castle wall.
The advantage to castle war is that you do not have to march out to a battlefield to fight.
You could have archers on your castle and the enemy is already at an extreme disadvantage.
The word castle comes from the latin word Castellum, they were fortified medieval structures that offered protection to nobility and other classes of people, although there were exceptions where medieval castles were used strictly for strategic positioning.
Medieval Castles were a European innovation that originated in the 9th and 10th centuries.
The Nobles of those times built castles to control the surrounding areas and to protect their families and wealth from rivals, It was also made it easier to plan and co-ordinate raids on other castles, towns and villages and you could always run back to the safety your own castle.
The Medieval castles during the period were divided into castles owned by the king and castles owned by Anglo-Norman Lords.
The main castles of the medieval period were those of the king and other nobles and these were the castles of the time that offered the best protection.
Urban castles which were also owned by the king were enforced by sheriff like people who were ordered by the king to keep peace in those lands.
The best medieval castle designs for both defences and aesthetic appeal came in the later parts of the medieval period, the Normans were master castle builders who introduced many designs Read more about the Best Castle Design >>
Medieval Castles were of a much more basic design in the earlier medieval periods, as the medieval period progressed castle design became much more sophisticated Read more about the Castle Design History >>
Concentric castles had several outer walls that made them difficult to attack,  because of the improved defences in concentric castle design they became very popular in late medieval times Read more about the Concentric Castles >>
Medieval Castles that have become famous were mainly built during later medieval times, there were many famous castles built during the Norman period of England's Medieval History.
Making a Castle Moat was quite an endeavour with moats being around 12 feet wide and 30ft deep, even bigger in some of the grander medieval castles of later medieval times Read more about the Making a Castle Moat >>
It was important to build castles with good defences against attacks, Defensive medieval castles were usually built quickly when a region or country had been defeated by the kings armies Read more about the Medieval Castle Defences >>
Early medieval castles were built quickly with the main focus of early medieval castles design being defense, as the medieval period advanced so did medieval castle design.
Most of the stunning medieval castles were built in later medieval times in Motte and Bailey designs and later magnificent Concentric castles Read more about the Medieval Castle History >>
Life in a Medieval castle was better for higher level medieval people.
The medieval castle was a large fortification that needed a large number of Troops to defend it from attack such as knights, guards and archers Read more about the Medieval Castle Military >>
The were many castle parts that made up a medieval Castle and as medieval weaponry improved so did the defensive parts of a castle.
A Castle Siege was usually a game of cat and mouse and good castle defences were vital for survival.
Battering Rams and Trebuchets (giant catapults) were popular castle siege weapons.
Medieval Castle Staff usually lived in Medieval Castles on a permanent basis, The Medieval Castle Staff provided all the labour required to keep the medieval castle running and worked for the king or lord who owned the castle.
Two of the most famous English Castles are Warwick and Windsor Castle which have to be two if the most stunning examples of medieval castles  still standing in today.
A network of Norman castles sprung up around Britain after the Norman conquest of England of 1066 Read more about the Medieval Norman Castles >>
Motte and Bailey Castles were a quick and easy way to build castles, they were built on dirt mounds the Motte and a lower part was called the Bailey Read more about the Motte & Bailey Castles >>
There were hundreds of stunning medieval castles built throughout Europe by renowned masons and Architects such as Gundulf, Robert de Belleme and Henry Yeverley Read more about the Who Designed Medieval Castles >>
Medieval times were brutal and Royals/Nobility needed to protect their families and wealth from enemies at home and abroad, the medieval castle provided this protection and gave them a base to launch attacks on other wealthy rivals and to maintain their power and wealth.
In the earliest of medieval times castles were built in strategic positions and their main purpose was to protect supplies from any threat, the majority of castles were being built in the cities and their only goal was as a  safe residence for the lords of England.
In the medieval period that followed invasions by foreign enemies on England and Wales invasions several variations of castle building was tried with the goal of improving castle defences.
After England was invaded by the Normans only two castles were built using stone, in Romanesque style and their purpose was military defense , as well as looking good.
All other castles were made from a mixture of wood and dirt and mixture of the two famous Motte and Bailey design and ring works.
In the early ages, castles could simply be avoided.
The usual area of which a castle could count as influential would be around 400 meters (1300 ft) and almost all their weapons (even in the early ages of artillery ) had a short range of fire.
During times of peace castles that did not have any significant importance to an area and were less manned than those with higher importance.
During times of war, too many soldiers defending a castle could put a strain on supplies and impair the castle’s ability to withstand a long siege.
The idea to build fortified structures first came up when the accumulation of wealth and resources was increasing and nobles started to lack safe places to store them.
Construction of castles used the early forms of architecture and all castles were built according to the surrounding region and country which they were protecting.
The castles were built to house military units and nobility.
The oldest types of castles were used as a defence against invading tribes who only had one idea in their mind, to steal everything you had.
The first basic forms of castle defences originated from fortifications that were for the benefit of noble families.
The castles which survived the attacks and raids provided the castle’s lord further chances for improvement of the castle and more control of the surrounding lands.
If taking a castle is the mission, most of the time a siege will be laid upon it.
A direct attack could be ordered but it was better and more tactically astute to place a siege upon a castle, which would penalise the castles guards morale, food supplies and will to fight.
Without relief from an external source, the defenders of the castle would eventually submit.
A Siege could last weeks, months and in rare occasions the siege could last for a year, if the castles supplies permitted it so.
The English Medieval Castle Windsor castle is a famous medieval castle
England is one of the best places in the world to see good examples of medieval castles, England has always been a country involved in warfare and and you can see medieval castles in great condition all over the country.
Warwick Castle in Warwickshire is a fine example of a medieval castle, it was built by William the conqueror in 1068 and is a grand highly fortified castle that was very advanced in medieval times.
The tower of London is also classed as a medieval castle and it is located right in the middle of London on the north bank of the river Thames.
A lesser know medieval castle is Bodiam in East Sussex, this is an almost perfect example of a late medieval castle was built with a moat.
It was built as a compact but well defended medieval castle.
The medieval castles of Europe first appeared in Normandy France and were usually a Motte and Bailey design, which was basically where dirt was removed to make a large mound in the middle and a ditch around the structure, they began to appear around the 900’s in Europe.
The Bayeux Tapestry in France actually shows images of the first European castles, there was usually a wall that enclosed the bailey, a tower at the top of the mound and wooden palisade that ran around it.
There are many stunning castles scattered around Europe that were built during the medieval period
Medieval Castles Parts Harlech Castle with castle parts indicated
Although castle design varied widely throughout Europe, there were some similar features that many castles incorporated – Medieval castles design and features differed across Europe,  however there were some similarities that all castles shared.
Arrow slits – as the name suggests Arrow slits were narrow gaps at the castle walls to protect the castle and allowed archers to shoot arrows at Castle attackers in relative safety from height.
The narrowness of the Arrow slits in the walls protected the archers from incoming fire from the castles attackers.
Castle battlements – these were basically gaps that allowed soldiers within the castles to fire upon attackers in defence of the castle whilst still having a wall to hide behind for protection.
Curtain wall – a castles curtain wall stretched around the castle as a walkway so that people could patrol around the castle easily looking for any dangers and potential attacks.
The castle wall also helped soldiers use different parts of the castle quickly and helped them move weapons to defend the castle to the areas where attacks were taking place.
The Castle keep – the Castle keep was a kind of safe room, a place where soldiers, royalty and others could seek refuge if the rest of the castle had fallen into enemy hands, the keep was a large tower structure and usually a place where a last stand was made by medieval soldiers defending a castle.
Castle Gatehouse – this was built at the entrance of the castle at the castle gate because the gate was the weakest point of the castle’s defences, the castle gatehouse helped to reinforce this area against enemy attack.
Castle moat – this is effectively a deep ditch which was dug out around the castle and was commonly filled with water, this extra obstacle against attackers gave the soldiers inside a castle more time to injure and kill people attacking the castle.
Usually there was a drawbridge at the entrance of the castle to allow supplies, weapons, military and other personnel into the castle.
Chateau Gaillard in France – a beautiful medieval castle was built in France by the famous Richard the Lion-heart.
Cite de Carcassonne – Another beautiful medieval castle built in France it was started by the Romans but is still a medieval castle.
Leeds Castle – was the residence of King Edward and is a well built medieval castle it is believe it was built in 1119 in the early part of the medieval period
Windsor Castle – Windsor Castle is home to Queen Elizabeth the Queen of England, it is a beautiful medieval castle that was built by William the Conqueror after he had conquered England and become its ruler in 1066.
Tower of London – This is another castle that was built by William the Conqueror in 1078 he started building the large white tower, this was the place that many traitors were executed and where torture took place, it has served as a armory prison, royal palace and Treasury amongst other things during its great history
The great country houses, built from stone or wood in the seventeenth to twentieth century were, and always will be, castles of their day.
These famous structures have very little military use in the 21st century and almost all of the remaining castles and their features are used as tourist attractions with guided tours and detailed historical activity about their medieval pasts.
Restoration of the castles was usually required if the castles were badly damaged during wars or conflicts and some were fitted with new staircases, walking path and restored towers.
The main use for castles today is the memory they bring of the darker ages of war, whether they were urban or rural, it does not matter, they are forever scarred with the marks of war.
Even if we cannot know for certain what exactly has happened in some castle, we can always look at the interior or exterior that has been damaged by the siege engines of war.
The tower house is one type of castle built during the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
The occupants of these buildings called them castles and they are considered a variety of castle within the genre.
The motte and bailey castle was introduced in England after the Norman Conquest.
William began a royal program of castle building for defensive purposes and to house garrisons and supplies.
These were later replaced by castles made of stone with square tower keeps.
A cluster of castles sharing some common control could represent a considerable concentration of political power.
Along with the king, greater barons built castles too.
In particular, barons were encouraged to build castles creating a deliberate defensive scheme along the borders of Scotland and Wales.
Under royal and baronial administration, courts would meet and accounts could be audited within the castle.
In the later Middle Ages, feudal obligations became obsolete.
While appearing to be similar to the tower-keeps of castles dating from the twelfth century, it differed in several ways.
However, the Irish enthusiastically adopted the practice of building castles and tower houses.
The majority of the castles in Ireland are tower houses.
These castles may have been scaled down versions of earlier Anglo-Norman keeps or possibly the secular equivalent of belfry towers that were built by Irish abbeys and monasteries in the fifteenth century.
The next time you see a picture of a medieval castle, will you recognize the tower house feature?
The term castle has been applied to structures as diverse as ancient hill forts and Renaissance country houses.
Over the millennium that castles were built, they took on a great many forms with many different features, but in the popular mind castles feature a range of elements including battlements, drawbridges and arrow slits.
In its simplest terms, the definition of a castle accepted amongst academics is "a private fortified residence".
This contrasts with earlier fortifications, such as Anglo Saxon burhs and walled cities such as Constantinople and Antioch in the Middle East; castles were not communal defences but were built and owned by the local feudal lords, either for themselves or for their monarch.
Historians enjoy debating the scope of the word, but usually accept a castle to be the private fortified residence of a monarch or nobleman.
The word castle is derived from the Latin word castellum which is a diminutive of the word castrum, meaning "fortified place".
The word castle was introduced into English shortly before the Norman Conquest to denote this type of building, which was then new to England.
For example, the French château is used to describe a grand country house at the heart of an estate, regardless of the presence of fortifications, and a castle is denoted by the term chateau fort.
The term castle has been used to refer to structures such as Iron Age fortifications, for example Maiden Castle, Dorset.
Many castles were originally built from earth and timber, but had their defences replaced later by stone.
Early castles often exploited natural defences, and lacked features such as towers and arrow slits and relied on a central keep.
During the First Crusade (1096–1099) Frankish armies encountered walled settlements and forts that they indiscriminately referred to as castles, but which would not be considered as such under the modern definition .
In the late 12th and early 13th centuries, a scientific approach to castle defence emerged.
Between 1066 and 1087 he established 36 castles to discourage rebellion.
A castle could act as a stronghold and prison but was also a place where a lord could entertain his peers.
Over time the aesthetics of the design became more important, as the castle's appearance and size began to reflect the prestige and power of its occupant.
Towards the end of the Middle Ages, castles tended to lose their military significance because of the advent of powerful cannons.
Although castles still provided protection from low levels of violence in later periods, eventually they were succeeded by country houses as high status residences.
Most castles as we know them are found in Europe and the Middle East and date from the Middle Ages.
The word castle comes from the Latin castellum, denoting a type of fortified structure.
A European innovation, castles originated in the 9th and 10th centuries, after the fall of the Carolingian Empire - its territory being divided among multiple lords and princes.
Medieval warfare - including the Crusades - featured many more sieges of castles than open battles.
Urban castles controled bothl important travel routes and the local populace.
Rural castles were often situated near to features that were integral to life, such as ponds, mills and fertile land.
In some countries, before a castle could be built it was necessary to obtain the permission of the king through a licence to crenellate, or else the builder risked it being seized or slighted – deliberately damaged to such an extent that the castle was indefensible.
This practice was not universal - in some countries the monarch had little control over lords, or required the construction of new castles to aid in securing the land so was unconcerned about granting permission, as was the case in England after 1066 and the Holy Land during the Crusades.
Switzerland (without a soveriegn monarch and a centralised state) is an extreme case of there being no state control over who built castles, and as a result there were 4,000 in the country.
Before the 12th century, castles were as uncommon in Denmark as they had been in England before the Norman Conquest.
Many new castles were polygonal or relied on concentric defence – several stages of defence within each other that could all function at the same time to maximise the castle's firepower.
These changes in defence have been attributed to a mixture of castle technology from the Crusades and inspiration from earlier defences such as Roman forts.
Not all the elements of castle architecture were military in nature, and even those that were often become decorative symbols of power - for example moats and machicolations.
Some grand castles had long winding approaches intended dominate the landscape and impress visitors.
Although gunpowder was introduced to Europe in the 14th century, it did not significantly affect castle building until the 15th century, when artillery became powerful enough to break through stone walls.
While castles continued to be built well into the 16th century, new techniques to deal with improved cannon fire made them uncomfortable and undesirable places to live.
As a result, true castles went into decline and were replaced by artillery forts with no role in civil administration, and by country houses that were generally indefensible.
From the 18th century onwards, there was a renewed interest in castles with the construction of mock castles, part of a romantic revival of Gothic architecture, but they had no military purpose.
Fantasy And Medieval Coloring Page Sheets Bluebonkers Castlescastle Coloring Pagesprintable Pictures
16 Castle Coloring Buildings Adult Coloring Coloring Pages 13038318413d Castle Draftlens12176161module132333241photo13038318413dcastle
I am currently trying to design a European city and Castle and draw it out, but the best I can do right now is draw a sand castle, so are there any good ones out there that you don't mind sharing?
Time period is during the Middle Ages, and also it can be anywhere in Europe, from the east to the west!
Try this castle in Wales:
It is an excellent example of a medieval castle, as well as being superbly preserved.
Also, just a quick question, I'm no expert in European history but are castles what Kings lived in?
There is a well preserved medieval castle on the island of Bornholm in Denmark.
Also, just a quick question, I'm no expert in European history but are castles what Kings lived in?
Royal castles, as far as I know, were fortified just like any other one, but they generally were much more luxurious than something along the lines of the Welsh castle that I showed you, which was a purely military installation.
Castle-building really changed in the 15th century, when artillery became powerful enough to break down castle walls.
With the obsolescence of military-oriented castles, you see a change to indefensible palace-castles like Neuschwanstein in Germany.
Royal castles, as far as I know, were fortified just like any other one, but they generally were much more luxurious than something along the lines of the Welsh castle that I showed you, which was a purely military installation.
Castle-building really changed in the 15th century, when artillery became powerful enough to break down castle walls.
With the obsolescence of military-oriented castles, you see a change to indefensible palace-castles like Neuschwanstein in Germany.
When thinking of a medieval castle-town, I always think of Rothenburg, Germany, which has many original houses from the Medieval Period.
kind of off-topic because it doesn't exist anymore, but pontefract castle near where i live, would be one of the largest castles in western europe, had it not been destroyed by oliver cromwell
kind of off-topic because it doesn't exist anymore, but pontefract castle near where i live, would be one of the largest castles in western europe, had it not been destroyed by oliver cromwell
Most existing stone castles in Co.Tipperary have their origins beginning in the 12th century, built in order to control the area immediately surrounding them.
Many earlier castles were originally built from earth and timber, but for defence reasons had their defences now replaced by stone.
Early castles also often exploited natural defences, built on river banks or natural rock outcrops and lacked features such as towers and arrow-slits, instead relying on a central ‘Keep.’
Large castle construction was often expensive, needing up to 400 stone masons, together with 2,000 unskilled workmen, 100 carts and wagons carrying building materials.
Tipperary castles were constructed as both offensive and defensive structures, providing a base from which raids could be launched, as well as offering protection against attacking enemies.
Rural castles were usually situated near features that were integral to every day living, such as manufacturing, mills and as often the case in Tipperary, to control land, Tipperary offering some of the richest farmland in Europe.
Urban castles were also necessary to exert control over the local populace and to guard against those who would disrupt important travel routes.
Many castles in Tipperary were established by Norman invaders, whose successful Lords and Earls regularly held court with those immediately below them on the social scale.
This new warfare did not significantly affect castle buildings until around the 15th century, when artillery became more manually controllable and at the same time powerful enough to break through thick stone fortifications.
Castles were built during the Middle Ages as fortified homes for kings and nobility.
During the Middle Ages much of Europe was divided up between lords and princes.
In order to defend themselves, they built their homes as large castles in the center of the land they ruled.
They could defend from attacks as well as prepare to launch attacks of their own from their castles.
Originally castles were made of wood and timber.
After the Middle Ages castles weren't built as much, especially as larger artillery and cannon were designed that could easily knock down their walls.
Although castle design varied widely throughout Europe, there were some similar features that many castles incorporated:
Moat - A moat was a defensive ditch dug around the castle.
It could be filled with water and there was typically a drawbridge across it to get to the castle gate.
Keep - The keep was a large tower and the last place of defense in a castle.
Curtain Wall - The wall around the castle which had a walkway on it from which defenders could fire arrows down onto attackers.
Gatehouse - The gatehouse was built at the gate to help reinforce the castle defenses at its weakest point.
Battlements - Battlements were at the tops of castle walls.
Windsor Castle - William the Conqueror built this castle after he became ruler of England.
Leeds Castle - Built in 1119, this castle later became the residence of King Edward I.
Cite de Carcassonne - Famous castle in France started by the Romans.
Spis Castle - Located in Eastern Slovakia, this is one of the largest Medieval castles in Europe.
Malbork Castle - Built in Poland in 1274 by the Teutonic Knights, this is the largest castle in the world by surface area.
Many castles kept their ale in a room called the buttery.
Siege engines were used to attack castles.
Often times attacking armies would wait outside and try to starve out the castle dwellers rather than attack them.
Many castles were built on a spring so they would have water during a siege.
The steward managed all the affairs of the castle.
Cats and dogs were kept in castles to help kill rats and keep them from eating the grain stores.
Such battles, however, were the exception, for during the Middle Ages warfare was a much more complicated affair that more often than not involved siegecraft.
After his 1066 victory at Hastings, William the Conqueror initiated a massive castle-building program in England that was instrumental in completing the Normans’ subjugation of the Anglo-Saxons.
Throughout medieval Europe and the Middle East, the castle functioned as a private fortress that, among its other roles, physically–and symbolically–proclaimed the status and strength of its lord to all comers, friend or foe.
Even the simplest earth and timber motte and bailey castle, used to great effect by the Norman kings of England, validated the power of the conquering force.
During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, castles evolved into powerful fortresses capable of defying intensive assaults.
At the same time, in order to combat strengthened castle defenses, siegecraft developed.
By the late Middle Ages, few major campaigns took place without at least one castle siege.
The successful castle siege skillfully combined sophisticated science with specific standards of conduct known to, but not always practiced by, the participants.
Ultimately, the siege dominated medieval warfare for at least as long as the castle dominated the social and political order of the day.
Besieging a castle was a much more complicated affair than simply ‘rushing into the breach,’ as Shakespeare’s Henry V exhorted his troops before the 1415 siege of Harfleur.
In fact the medieval siege was a complex, highly choreographed process that ended with a castle assault only when other tactics had failed to force a surrender.
Besieging a castle involved assembling and paying an army, gathering supplies, and hauling them to the siege site.
If it was successful enough to gain control of the castle, the army’s now-weakened troops might not be capable of repulsing a renewed attack by forces sent to relieve the garrison.
Early medieval sieges were generally directed against towns or major cities, which were often fortified, rather than at individual castles.
As castle sieges became more commonplace, besiegers devised methods to overcome increasingly complex defenses.
Until about 1100, tactics mainly consisted of using firepower to break through the castle’s physical defenses or of starving out the defenders by blockade.
Commanders first had to devise an overall strategy for taking the castle.
First, the archbishop of Canterbury, the king’s advocate, excommunicated the castle’s garrison, hoping to demoralize the defenders into surrendering.
Given the huge effort involved in coordinating a siege and assembling an army, potential besiegers made at least cursory efforts to convince the garrison, the constable, or the lord of the castle to surrender peaceably.
Truces effectively delayed a full-blown assault, so that the constable could contact his lord for directions on how to handle the situation or to gain assistance at the castle.
At times, attackers threw javelins or shot crossbow bolts at the castle gateway to signal their intentions.
By the late Middle Ages, cannon fire signaled the beginning of sieges.
When a garrison refused to surrender, the balance of besieging forces would trek to the siege site, set up their encampment, and construct some basic defenses of their own not too far from the castle’s walls.
In order to ease access to the castle, attackers might first fill the strongpoint’s surrounding dry ditch or wet moat with tree branches, gorse, heather, loose earth, or whatever else was available.
Alternatively, they might sail a barge to the base of the castle’s outer, or curtain, wall.
During this effort, archers, crossbowmen, and slingers outside the castle provided protective fire for their comrades while shielding themselves behind screens known as pavises.
At the same time, the besiegers assaulted the main gate’s heavy timber doors and attempted to set afire any timber rooftops shielding castle towers.
They might also begin hammering the masonry defenses with picks, iron bars, and other tools while protected inside a hide-covered timber-and-iron framework, known variously as a cat, rat, tortoise, or turtle, which had been wheeled to the castle wall.
They also began constructing siegeworks or a siege castle, sometimes called a countercastle, in preparation for a prolonged conflict.
How the operation developed depended on the strength, size, and resources of the attacking army; the condition and complexity of the castle’s fortifications; the fortress’ armory and supplies; as well as the resolve of the besieged.
Despite the inherent inaccuracy of this torsion-powered machine, which is sometimes called a catapult, the mangonel could effectively break through stone walls or knock down a castle’s battlements.
Mangonels were occasionally used to hurl dead carcasses over battlements in an effort to spread disease among the castle defenders.
In response, defenders sometimes used their own siege engines to toss back one of the besiegers–if they had managed to capture one during the escalade or during a raid outside the castle–or a messenger who carried unacceptable surrender terms.
The Romans modified the modest Greek siege engine known as the scorpion into a horrific dart-firing machine called the ballista, which was later used during the Middle Ages.
Rather than simply grabbing a giant log and repeatedly thrusting it at castle gates or stone walls until they broke through, medieval soldiers did their ramming from inside a timber framework called a penthouse or pentise.
The attackers used rollers, levers, ropes, pulleys, and winches to maneuver the penthouse into place at the base of the castle wall.
Defenders would counter by using hook-ended ropes to grab the ram and overturn the penthouse or by swinging beams on pulleys to smash the timber cat as it approached the castle.
Eventually, the incessant pounding breached walls, killed personnel, or crushed siege engines defending the castle.
In 1216 the French army first used a variety of techniques and weapons to try to breach the resistant castle walls.
After the English garrison broke the truce, killed many of the French soldiers posted outside the castle, and interfered with the movement of troops and supplies, the prince returned to Dover, which he again besieged.
Despite the losses and his retreat back to France, Louis left an important legacy in England: new technology that not only changed how sieges were conducted but also influenced the design of castle defenses.The trebuchet was also useful for flinging all sorts of projectiles over the curtain walls to create mayhem.
In twelfth-century medieval France, Count Geoffrey V of Anjou used a siege engine to hurl a heated iron jar filled with Greek fire at the castle of Montreuil-Bellay, which promptly fell after having endured a three-year siege.
England’s Edward I, a master of siegecraft as well as castle building, was particularly fond of the trebuchet and used it and other siege engines against castles in Scotland, Wales, and France in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries.
Located in the Scottish Borders about three miles from Dumfries, the castle of the Lords Maxwell posed a formidable obstacle to the king’s plans to control Scotland.
Originally composed in French, the work remains an invaluable record of the tactics and technology involved in conducting a castle siege.
According to Walter, ‘Caerlaverock was so strong a castle that it feared no siege before the King came there, for it would never have had to surrender, provided that it was well supplied, when the need arose, with men, engines and provisions.’
Ships hauled in supplies by sea, while the siege train journeyed northward to the castle.
Then they laid siege to the Scottish castle.
English and Breton soldiers toting small arms charged the castle walls while siege engines began their assault.
The English ended the siege by formally taking over the castle and flying the king’s standard.
If a castle was strong enough to withstand the pounding of siege engines and if the garrison refused to surrender, the commander of the besieging army still had several options.
He could employ sappers to dig tunnels underneath castle walls and towers.
For almost seven weeks John used five siege engines to pound away at the powerful stronghold, but he failed to take the castle from the well-supplied and well-armed defenders.
It was a multipurpose machine that would be rolled to the battlements of a castle so that the men secreted inside could climb onto the walls or operate weapons, such as battering rams and mangonels, from close-range positions of relative safety.
Bringing a siege tower into the fray was an expensive prospect and required advance planning, plenty of building materials, skilled craftsmen, and enough soldiers to move the engine as close to the castle as possible.
Windy weather posed problems, and the large, slow-moving belfry was vulnerable to fire from castle siege engines, as well as archers and crossbowmen.
Sappers might dig at the castle foundations from inside the tower.
Archers, crossbowmen, gunners, and armored knights manned upper levels, firing at the castle defenders while waiting to pounce upon them when the drawbridge dropped onto the curtain wall.
The castle must have been a formidable foe to precipitate such an extensive and expensive undertaking.
Given the destructive power of siege engines, the devastation that mining could cause, and the determination of the attacking army, one would expect a breach in the castle’s walls or the surrender of the garrison during the later stages of a siege.
With the attackers already in place around the castle, and much of the land scorched, the likelihood was poor at best that reinforcements and additional supplies would safely reach the besieged.
Occasionally, a castle’s constable might concoct shrewd displays to induce an attacking commander to abandon his plans and move on.
His actions suggested to the attackers that the castle was so filled with food that the men inside could resist a siege indefinitely.
Many sieges ended with the waving of a white flag or the handing over of castle keys to the leader of the attacking force.
Negotiations would then begin to ensure the safety of the garrison or of any important individuals remaining in the castle.
While the castle ably withstood the battering, Felton began negotiating a pardon for himself and Hugh le Despenser II, boy heir to the lordship of Glamorgan.
In March 1327, Felton obtained amnesty and surrendered the castle and its provisions.
By 1415, when Henry V besieged Harfleur, the king’s favored weapon was the cannon, the fire from which devastated the castle’s barbican to the point that the English could then torch the castle and force the French garrison’s surrender.
In response to changing technology, castle-builders devised sturdier defenses to thwart the bombards, as at Craignethan Castle in Scotland, where low, thick bastion walls with cannon loops were added in 1530.
As the construction of new castles waned, Henrician gun forts–Henry VIII’s so-called Italian ‘Device’ forts, armed with clustered circular batteries of heavy artillery that eased cannon positioning–began to take their place.
Like the timber siege engines, in time the castle became obsolete, not just as a weapon in the medieval arsenal but also as a formidable residence.
Yet castles continued to serve a military function until well into the seventeenth century, when they thwarted the efforts of Parliament to defeat King Charles I.
While castles and trebuchets no longer play a critical role in the military theater, the conventions of siege warfare still guide the efforts of military strategists around the world.
Above: From a famous manuscript Edward gives instructions to his castle architect, James of St George
One of the most impressive of these remains in Wales today - the magnificent castles undertaken by Edward and his master mason, James of St. George in the 1280s and 90s.
To investigate the role of castles one must look at both the primary sources which provide narrative detailing the part which these castles played and secondary sources which will provide an independent analysis of these structures with the benefit of hindsight.
Secondary sources specifically examining the social and historical role of these castles are few and far between, the most helpful being Edward I by Michael Prestwich and The Three Edwards, again by Michael Prestwich.
His sources were, of course, limited and due to the lack of reliable communication in the Middle Ages, quite possibly distorted or untrue.
The Edwardian castles of Wales are hardly mentioned in Froissart and other texts of the time.
Nevertheless, I found that the place of the castle fell into three principal categories: the socio-economic and administrative role, the military role, and the role they played as a propagandist symbol of Edward's regal and divine authority over Wales.
The social role includes the employment of the castle as a royal palace and safe place for dignitaries to stay and also the significance of the castle to its town, which in most cases was built alongside (geographically and chronologically) its protector.
The most well known of these castles, and probably the most influential, are: Conway, Caernarfon, Harlech, Flint, Rhuddlan, Beaumaris, Builth and Aberwyswyth.
I shall first consider the social role of the castle in Wales.
When a new castle was begun, an entirely new town, or bastide, was also erected in most cases.
The new towns founded alongside most of the castles were undoubtedly central to the English strategy of settlement and Anglicisation but we can well ask whether in fact given the situation of these settlements, such huge and sophisticated military fortifications were something in the way of overkill.
Is it possible that Edward and the English Government felt that the propaganda role of these castles was the most important not only in impressing English power upon Welsh peasants but perhaps more importantly in the late thirteenth century and continuing into the fourteenth century to give reluctant English colonists a greater sense of security?
Administrative control seems also to have been based at these castles and in the words of R. R. Davies, were to be the seats of civilian governance whilst also being the headquarters of a new ... financial, and judicial dispensation.
It was from one of these castles, Rhuddlan, that The Statute of Wales, passed in 1284, laid out Edward I's groundplan for ruling his new dominions.
The castles themselves were known to have been used for hearings but they were by no means sufficient and much of the bulk of new litigation was carried out far from them.
The legal transformation of Wales did not, therefore, rely directly on castles, though of course, as later uprisings in the principality showed, a general peace was required for civilian magistrates and administrators from England to fulfil their duties.
Legal reforms were designed to mould Welsh society and Welsh outlooks to English ways of thinking long before any of these castles were completed.
Militarily, Wales by definition needed to have been conquered before construction could begin and the castles themselves, as has been claimed for centuries, never fired a shot in anger.
As for the castles' role in this militarily hostile environment, it is arguable that they acted as much as deterrents to uprisings than as actual strongholds during the years of peace following the Conquest.
In the uprising of 1294-5, when the castles were nearing completion, peace in Wales was established and maintained by field armies and not by the castles which were bypassed somewhat by the action.
There are exceptions, however, and Flint, which had been completed much earlier than the other castles, in 1282, still did not deter the Welsh revolt of that year, which under Dafyd laid siege to the castle.
During the 1295/96 revolt the castles' garrisons were depleted by the king's expedition to Gascony and indeed generally the garrisons of the castles ... were on a scale which seems surprisingly small [being] from thirty to sixty men.
Caernarfon was relieved, and in the spring of 1295 work began on the last of Edward's castles, Beaumaris, built as a necessary means of controlling Anglesey.
The castles subsequently were not maintained and as early as the 1340s they were already run-down (hardly surprising as repairs to Caernarvon by 1300 had already amounted to over £16,000).
I suggest that the castles were beginning to be considered little more than white elephants or mascots of the Welsh conquest.
It was during the revolt of Owain Glyn Dwr in Henry IV's reign that the castles were once again considered a target and played a significant part in protecting English Wales, coming through the test with flying colours.
A report of 1404 brought to Chester by a woman declares that the Welsh rebels ... are preparing to assault the town and castle of Caernarvon.
It continues to say that there are only twenty-eight fighting men in the town and castle and that it is too small a force.
The dilapidated castles were eventually put to the test and the immense investment of Edward I was now appreciated.
The walls were seemingly just too strong for the modest equipment of the Welsh and only two castles fell, Harlech and Aberystwyth.
It was the strength of the castle rather than the number of English troops which secured Wales as garrisons generally were so small.
Jeffrey L. Thomas, an American historian, wrote that although Edward's castles in Wales were at times little more than lonely outposts and mere symbols of English control in hostile territory, they were in fact extremely effective in preventing the Welsh from permanently reversing Edward's victories of 1277 and 1282 and regaining control of the region.
Edward's castles time and time again proved their worth, never more so than during the Glyn Dwr revolt.
It is therefore shown that whilst their part in suppressing the Welsh during the reign of 'the three Edwards' was generally successful, these castles in the long run were by no means the end of a Welsh military presence in Wales.
Below: Conwy Castle - one of Edward's most impressive castles of north Wales
There is no doubt, though, that during these revolts the new settler towns which were all important to Edward's Welsh strategy were saved and protected by the castles whose rôle therefore, (overlapping slightly with the castle's social role), became somewhat economic.
Then came castles, bringing with them new commercial and trading opportunities and the first glimmers of an urban life as new communities grew up around their walls.
In this sense, the castles were important but once again we have to ask ourselves if the lavish scale on which they were constructed was necessary simply to allow the development of the towns.
Why then did Edward invest such a great amount of resources in these castles?
We have seen how the castles were used but were not indispensable in the legal reforms which led the English policy of incorporating Wales into the realm.
Finally we have looked at the evidence that the castles were necessary both to stimulate and to defend the English settlements that were drawn up around them and that provided the main stay economically and politically of the continued English presence in Wales.
Therefore it is here that one must look for the role of these castles.
They were already given superior privileges to the native Welsh and there is no doubt that the sheer scale and impressive nature of the new castles were used as yet another element of the propaganda to attract colonists, hitherto less than confident of the security of the new lands.
Frequently the castle was the only place of asylum or at least the safest.
The castle, therefore, provided a shield and supposed immunity against Welsh offensives: a promise which must have influenced and possibly swayed the balance for many colonists who eventually moved to one of these 'new towns'.
Flint Castle, inspired by the Crusades, was probably most directly influenced by the castle at Yverdon, in Savoy, and the deliberate echoing of the walls of Constantinople in Caernarvon Castle with its turrets surmounted by eagles was undoubtedly meant to reinforce the impression and ambition of Edward as imperial ruler and powerful monarch of a powerful kingdom.
The castles on the Welsh coast almost undoubtedly had implicit statements to make about royal ambition and power in Wales as much as general English aims - they were, from the start, on a completely different scale from those of the Marcher lords, (which many consider to be undeniably smaller but also more militarily efficient).
The regal element of these castles is often ignored.
Ironically, then, it may have been for reasons centred in England that the castles were built on such a scale.
Yet far larger towns were defended by much smaller castles from much greater attacks - Hereford, Shrewsbury, Abergavenny.
It was for the benefit of people in England that Edward ordered the building of castles the like of which had barely been seen in Britain before and have not been seen since.
Edward was a visionary and an idealist who craved to convey an image of an emperor-king, an enlightened ruler bringing not only law to Wales but also castles such as those he had seen crusading in the Holy Land.
Edward I was a strong king, and it follows he wanted to build strong castles, whether wholly justified by military and administrative demands or not.
The castles fulfilled both important and mundane rôles in the conquest and later life of Wales.
They did not help the cause of Richard II although they played a key part in maintaining English supremacy during the Glyn Dwr Revolt as the Welsh only seized two major castles: Harlech and Aberystwyth and vast military supremacy enabled their recapture by the English.
Prestwich, Michael Armies and Warfare in the Middle Ages p 209
Prestwich, Michael Armies and Warfare in the Middle Ages p 209
The Later Middle Ages in England, 1216-1485 p 88
Prestwich, Michael Armies and Warfare in the Middle Ages (New Haven, USA, 1996)
The Later Middle Ages in England, 1216-1485 (Harlow, 1989)
One of the most famous castles in northern England is without a doubt castle Alnwick.
If you want to relive history, you have to visit Burg Eltz, famous Herman castle with the 800 year long history.
It was made to be home for several high class families, who have opened part of the castle to tourists.
France has many famous castles, but one of the best known ones is Château de Chenonceau, beautiful castle who remained in the spotlight of the European history.
Considered by many historians to be one of the finest crafted medieval castles from 13th and 14th century Europe, castle Conwy even today represents one of the most spectacular castles in the entire world.
With its history that spans more than 800 years, Heidelberg Castle managed to become one of the most famous castle ruins of the Germany that is visited by millions of tourists each year.
Highclere Castle is perfect example of the high class English castle house, which has found newfound glory in the modern times with the advent of the fashion that romanticized view of the 16th century.
As one of the most famous castles in 12th century, Leeds castle played an important role in the politics and history of England.
Find out more about this influential castle here.
Hailed as one of the prettiest castles ever made, Lichtenstein castle is the castle you really need to visit one day.
Neuschwanstein Castle is one of the most famous castles in the world.
Created in late 1800s, this incredibly beautiful caste served as an inspiration to the countless of artists who looked it as the perfect “fantasy” castle.
London and its surrounding area are home of many castles that were created during the time of Norman Invasion, but the most famous of them all is without the doubt Tower of London.
If you want to find out something more about one of the best known castles in England, Warwick Castle, enter in here and learn most interesting points about its origins, wartime history, its owners and its current condition.
As the home of the English royal family, London’s Windsor castle is one of the most famous castles in the world.
With history spanning to the 11th century, this castle remained the in the spotlight of the public.
Throughout the last thousand years, thousands upon thousands castles were constructed all across the Europe and the world.
Castle history started in Europe and the Middle East during the Middle Ages, and was supported almost completely by nobility and military.
Castle can be defined as a type of fortified structure, usually built from earth and timber, but their defenses were later replaced by stone.
Read here more about evolution of castles.
If you want to learn more about famous castles, construction, locations, and the way they managed to impact our culture, history, warfare and fashion, this is the perfect place to do so.
Modern history of Europe was defined with both constant warfare and numerous fashion changes that were carried on by royalty and nobility, and during all that time, castles stood as a proud guardians of history.
Proliferation of castle construction started spreading across entire Europe in 9th century, and ever since then advances in technology, stonework, long range weapons and fashion fueled more than 7 centuries of the golden age of castle history.
Early history of castles began in some 6000 years ago when ancient Egyptians, Chinese and Middle Eastern civilizations started organized fortification of their smaller settlements, and occasional hill fort built to be used in defensive capability.
Durability and usefulness of those early castles was very rudimentary, but because of the lack of powerful siege weapons, even simpler wooden forts managed to provide significant defense against invading military forces.
Tremendous expansion of castle use in Europe happened after the fall of Carolingian Empire in 9th and 10th century.
With Europe being divided between countless larger and smaller lords, Royalty and Church which was viewed as a savior of history, arts and architecture during the darkest times of European Dark and Middle Ages.
With castles starting to be made all across the Europe, most were reinforced wooden homes, with motes and other natural defensive structures that protected them (flattened hills, cliffs).
However, with increase of wars across entire Europe and the organized expansion of Normans beyond Scandinavia in 11th century, castles started being made from stone.
That period of time was specifically notable for the rise of famous English castles such as Windsor Castle, Tower of London, Warick and Alnwick castles, all which remained standing to today, providing stability and military support during times of war and governmental and historical centers during time of peace.
These advances introduced significant changes to the stonework of European castles (spearheaded by the most advances castles of that time created by the Military Orders of Knights Hospitaller, Knights Templar, and Teutonic Knights), ushering a several centuries of magnificent castle construction that was remembered fondly in 19th and 20th century in the popular wave of romanticized mediaeval architecture, most notably in Victorian times.
Armored with heavy defenses, multiple walls, towers, impressive castles began the pride of Germany, France and England.
As 17th and 18th century arrived, relative stabilization of Europe and the advent of gunpowder weapons forced decline in the construction of defensive castles.
This large switch enabled creation of many famous castles that were highly fashionable, with even old 11-14th century castles receiving heavy retrofitting with each new generation of owners.
By late 18th and entire 19th century, Europe became enhanced in the nostalgia about Renaissance and medieval times, which was cause for the creation of very elaborate and fashionable castles that are today regarded as some of the best castles ever made.
One of the most famous ones is without the doubt German castle Neuschwanstein that was built by Ludwig II of Bavaria in 1892.
This castle today represents the base of all modern pop-culture castles set in the medieval times.
History of castles is long and interesting, and their heritage still continues to enrich our modern culture.
Early castles were made of wood.
Some castles had a moat around them and a draw-bridge that would be let down if you wanted to get into or out of the castle.
The bailey was the closed place around the inner part of a castle.
If you wanted to attack a castle you would have to get by the bailey first.
Some castles were built on high mountains.
Some castles were built near the sea, so that defenders could see enemies who came by boat.
There were holes in the walls of a castle so that the archers could shoot arrows at an enemy.
Later on, castles often had round walls, which made them harder for the enemy to hit.
Medieval castle in Spain - Christof1887
But keeping castles was very expensive and only kings, lords and other noblemen could live in castles with their families.
A castle helped a lord or a king defend the land around it.
The people in the villages around the castle brought food to the people who lived there.
A castle had many rooms or chambers.
It was the centre of castle life.
A castle also had a big kitchen and many private bedrooms as well as bathrooms for the people who lived there.
At the end of the Middle Ages - about 1500 A.D. - castles lost their importance.
They were no longer as safe as before because enemies started to use cannons to attack castles.
Gothic castles have occupied a place in people's imaginations for hundreds of years.
Gothic novels were written to develop feelings of fear and terror in a reader - and were set in evocative, crumbling old castles, abbeys and manors.
Hunyad Castle is an example of a spooky, gothic castle.
Nowadays, when people talk of 'gothic castles', they're usually meaning a mix of these two ideas.
A terrifying tower of one of our favourite gothic castles - Hunyad in Transylvania.
Gothic novels were written to develop feelings of fear and terror in a reader - and were set in evocative, crumbling old castles, abbeys and manors.
Hunyad Castle is an example of a spooky, gothic castle.
Nowadays, when people talk of 'gothic castles', they're usually meaning a mix of these two ideas.
Before Gothic Architecture came along, castles of early Medieval times were cold, dark and damp.
Building technology was rudimentary, which meant that most castles were encumbered with tiny windows and leaky roofs.
Worse still, the castles were often liable to attack - square towers could easily be toppled when attackers burrowed beneath just one of the corners.
Gothic architecture was a mid-Medieval movement that revolutionised the way that buildings were built.
They contrasted dramatically to the short and dark towers of older castles.
These was made possible by the developments above, and ushered in a new age of design, which was dramatically different from the claustrophobic old castles of before.
However, some castles began to be built in the gothic fashion - Malbork Castle in Poland being the most obvious example.
Evidently, these light, airy and sophisticated gothic designs were a vast step-up from the dark, dank old stone castles of yore.
Fundamentally, gothic architecture really marked a renaissance in castle design.
It transformed castles from being fortresses with unpleasant living quarters, to majestic and impressive buildings with beautiful residential apartments for the Lord and his family.
Gothic design also marked an improvement in terms of castle defence.
The skills to build more complex and sophisticated buildings - such as round towers - made castles harder to attack.
Round towers had no corners for attackers to burrow beneath, and topple the castle!
Often, these novels were set in the ruins of old castles.
Gothic writers loved the imagery of an old castle - a place of decayed grandeur, once full of life and vitality, but now seeped in decay.
They described castles as being filled with memories of life gone by; and marked by death.
This meant that castles were often used as a setting in gothic novels.
After all, the very first gothic tale was called The Castle of Otranto- set in a spooky castle filled with creaking doors, dark corners, ghostly footsteps, and hidden passageways.
As a result of the influence of the gothic novel, people's imaginations began to conjure up pictures of 'gothic castles'.
The public began to imagine castles to be deserted places of hauntings, murders, mystery and intrigue.
People envisaged castles to be filled with secret passages, terrible old mysteries, and even to be filled with vampires and fearful creatures (see more on Hunyad castle, just below!)
Fundamentally, gothic fiction created an image of spooky, deserted and menacing old castles.
Hunyad Castle (variously known as Corvinesti Castle or Corvin Castle, after the family who used to own it) is undoubtedly the spookiest of all gothic castles.
Parts of the castle exterior are decorated with over-ornate gothic detail (see the picture just below), and the innards are filled with vaulted-ceilings over vast, echoing halls.
This castle has been ravaged by fire on numerous occasions, and restorations in the 1800s and 1900s over-exaggerated the gothic style on the outside of the building.
There's another dastardly old legend attached to the castle.
The prisoners were never freed despite toiling to build the old castle well.
In common with the gothic castles featured in film and novels, Hunyad is famed for its ghosts.
An old photograph from the 1800s depicts a shadowy figure floating between old columns, and the castle is a common spot for ghoul hunters, no-doubt encouraged by its fearsome appearance.
Malbork Castle, in Poland, is undoubtedly the most impressive of all gothic castles.
The red-brick castle-complex is absolutely vast, spanning no less than 52 acres (making it the largest castle in the world by area), and is designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The crimson exterior of the castle is unmistakably gothic in design.
However, it's the staggering internal gothic detail which elevates Malbork above all other gothic castles.
The complex - unrivalled by any other gothic castles - is an elaborate mixture of religious architecture, which includes a church, monastery and bell-tower, alongside dramatic fortifications and crenellated battlements.
The complex was built between 1276 and 1406 by the Teutonic Knights, an order of Catholic adherents involved in the crusades of the Middle Ages.
The perfect vaulted arches within Malbork Castle are a beautiful example of gothic castles architecture.
Just the mention of 'castles' to many people today conjures up images to haunted, gothic ruins.
Discover more cunning plots, dusty legends, and tales of England's most beautiful castles...
The castles of the world are some of the most popular historic sites on the planet.
The list of world castles is as varied as it is long and contains everything from world famous castles to hidden castles and ruined castles which are now but a shadow of their former glory.
The castles that we know today really began appearing from around 800-1000AD in Europe.
As more countries took on a feudal structure, local lords and nobles began building castles to secure their hold over their particularl fiefdom.
Later, castles began to be constructed in a more connected fashion, by increasingly-powerful kings developing more cohesive military systems – a good example of this trend was seen after the Norman conquest of England in 1066AD.
In time, castles sprang up throughout Europe and, with the advent of the Crusades, castles were increasingly common in the Middle East and North Africa.
However, the development of gunpowder-based weaponry – particularly artillery – meant that the military importance of the castle declined and soon castles became militarily defunct.
However, the cachet associated with castles remained and many of the wealthier classes continued to build castles as grand private homes, ensuring that the list of castles of the world we have today kept growing throughout the centuries.
Nowadays, castle enthusiasts can explore castles in many different countries.
The list of castles of the world is immense and can be fascinating to explore.
Indeed, the castles of the world appeal to both family day trippers, casual travellers and ardent historians alike, making castles some of the most popular tourist attractions.
We’ve pulled together a list of some of the most interesting castles around the world as well as some of the biggest castles and the most famous castles in the world.
Our list of world castles continues to grow and you can explore using the world castles map above or the list of world castles below.
Click on each castle for further information, map location, directions and entry details.
The castle was slighted after the Civil War and a new residence, Alton Towers, was later built in the 18th century.
In the 19th century a new mock castle was constructed next to the old castle.
Definition of castle in English:
castle
1A large building, typically of the medieval period, fortified against attack with thick walls, battlements, towers, and often a moat: Edinburgh Castle the crumbling stonework of a ruined castle
Only a few years later the castle withstood a long siege by the Welsh, although its defenders were near starvation.
Views from the top are tremendous and the castle's natural defensive position on a rocky promontory overlooking Milford Haven is immediately apparent.
It was the work of William Marshall, son in law of Strongbow, conqueror of Ireland and the man responsible for the wholesale reconstruction of the castle in stone in the late 12th/early 13th centuries.
Another absorbing feature of the castle is the gatehouse, which had a complex barbican and no fewer than three portcullises.
A battlemented flying arch inside the gatehouse is something of a puzzle, for it would appear to be of little use in repelling invaders who had actually forced entry into the castle.
Pembroke is also noteworthy as the only castle in Britain to be built over a natural cavern, a large cave known as the Wogan.
During the troubled reign of King Charles I, the castle was attacked in turn by both Royalist and by Roundheads as the sympathies of its occupants altered.
Over the past 10 years much effort has been made to bring the history of the castle to life.
In this respect the visitor will find an exhibition room telling the fascinating history of the castle from the arrival of Arnulf de Montgomery to the present day, in addition there are a number of exciting tableaux depicting various moments in the castle's history such as the birth of Henry VII.
The castle and a well stocked gift shop are open all year.
A concentric castle is a castle with two or more concentric curtain walls, where the outer wall is lower than the inner and can be defended from it.
Concentric castles resemble one enclosure castle nested inside the other, generally without a central free-standing keep.
Where the castle includes a particularly strong tower (donjon), such as at Krak or Margat, it projects from the inner enceinte providing a sort of citadel - a castle within a castle within a castle.
The word concentric does not imply that these castles were circular in plan.
The layout was rectangular where the terrain permitted (Belvoir, Beaumaris), or an irregular polygon where curtain walls of a spur castle followed the contours of a hill (Krak, Margat).
The relationship of the concentric castle to other forms of fortification is complex.
In German-speaking countries, many castles had double curtain walls with a narrow ward between them, called a Zwinger (English lists, French lices).
These double walls were usually added at vulnerable points like the gate, but rarely as fully developed as the in concentric castles.
The earliest example of a concentric castle is the crusader castle of Belvoir (c 1168), whose regular rectangular layout has been described as one castrum nested inside another.
Some historians have plausibly argued that the concentric defence arose as a response to advances in siege technology in the crusader states from the 12th to the 13th centuries.
In a concentric castle the outer wall protected the inner one from siege engines, while the inner wall and the projecting towers provided flanking fire from crossbows.
Krak des Chevaliers in Syria is the best preserved of the concentric crusader castles.
While a concentric castle has double walls and towers on all sides, the defences are not necessarily uniform in all directions.
Concentric castles were expensive to build, so that only the powerful military orders, the Hospitallers and Templars, or kings such as Edward I, could afford to build and maintain them.
Such castles were beyond the means of feudal barons.
Consequently, concentric castles coexisted with more modest enclosure castles and tower keeps even in the crusader states.
Concentric castles appeared in Europe in the 13th century, with the castles built in Wales by Edward I providing some outstanding examples, in particular Beaumaris Castle, although Beaumaris remains unfinished.
As Beaumaris was built on flat terrain, it was necessary to build walls and towers facing in all directions, giving a very regular, almost square, floor plan to the castle.
