Bramshill House

Bramshill House, now a police staff training college, was built in 1605-1612 for Edward, Lord Zouche of Harringworth.
In 1960 Bramshill House became the permanent home of the principal police staff training college in the UK.
From 2009 Bramshill House will be undergoing a refurbishment programme which is due for completion in 2014.
Bramshill is currently used as the UK Police Staff College.
Lord Zouche's manor, Bramshill House
The principal Elevation of Bramshill House, in
Bramshill House was the residence of Edward, Lord
In the reign of Charles I. Bramshill House was partly destroyed by
Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
Bramshill House, is to be observed the attempt at Italian improvement,
from Bramshill House.
same period as Bramshill House.
The Arcade at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
The Stone Screen in the Hall at Bramshill House,
Library at Bramshill House, Hampshire.
Ceilings at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
The Home Office will sell its Bramshill House, which also includes a Grade-II listed park of medieval origins, to heritage property developers City and Country.
The present form of Bramshill House and Gardens dates from the early 17th Century and although it incorporates much of a 14th Century house, most of what we see today was built between 1605 and 1625 by Edward, 11th Baron Zouche of Harringworth.
The Cope family occupied Bramshill House and Gardens from 1703 until 1935.
Now listed Grade I, Bramshill House and Gardens stands in 106ha of grounds which are located in the centre of a Grade II* listed park which extends to 240ha over several ownerships.
The Chief Superintendent volunteered the information that the Bramshill House was haunted by no less than 14 spirits and that the most important feature of the White Lady was that she announced her presence with a strong floral fragrance, the smell of the arum lilies or the lily-of-the-valley.
Bramshill House contents at Bellmans
This May, Bellmans Auctioneers are excited to offer for sale some of the contents of Bramshill House, the former Police Training College in Hampshire.
Built in the early 17th century, Bramshill House is one of the largest Jacobean mansions in the country, and has been described as ‘one of the glories of English architecture’ by historians Anthony Blunt and James Lee-Milne.
In its unique and varied history, Bramshill House was the site of a Red Cross Maternity Home during World War Two, and the residence of the exiled King Michael and Queen Anne of Romania in the post-war period.
It became the location of the Police Staff College (later the European Police College) in 1960; the vast site also housed the British National Police Library.
As a result of the relocation of the police facilities, Bellmans are delighted to have been chosen to auction some of the contents of Bramshill House.
Objects of note include lot 1345, a massive elm and oak refectory table made from an impressive single slab of elm measuring 438cm long and 10cm thick (illustrated), the sister of which remains in residence in the Great Hall at Bramshill House.
Adding a sense of history are two oak ceremonial armchairs dating from 1973 (lot 1255), which were commissioned for Her Majesty the Queen and HRH Prince Phillip on the occasion of their visit to Bramshill House.
Bellmans Saleroom Manager Will Pasfield comments “it is a genuine pleasure to oversee the auction process for the contents of Bramshill House, which reflects the fantastic facilities and service offered by Bellmans Auctioneers.
Bramshill House
Bramshill House: Location
Bramshill House Location of Bramshill House in Hampshire
Bramshill House is located at the approximate centre of a triangular shape formed by Reading, Basingstoke and Farnborough, about 47 miles by road southwest of central London.
Bramshill House: History
Based on the similarity of the surviving vaults under Bramshill House and those under what became the servants' hall and steward's room at Windsor Castle, it may have been a copy of William of Wykeham's work there.
Lord Zouche demolished a large part of the building and began to build the Bramshill House of today.
Bramshill House became a Grade I listed building on 8 July 1952, and was acquired by the British government the following year as a dedicated site for police training.
From 2005, two buildings on the site housed the European Police College until it was moved to Budapest in 2014.
Bramshill House: Architecture
The 15-bedroom Bramshill House is one of the largest and most important Jacobean mansions in England, described as one of the "glories of English architecture" by the historians Anthony Blunt and James Lees-Milne.
Bramshill House is three storeys high on the southern main entrance side and two storeys high to the north and east.
Bramshill House, south façade with oriel window in centre Bramshill House, in Bramshill, northeast Hampshire, England, is one of the largest and most important Jacobean prodigy house mansions in England.
It was built in the early 17th century by Baron Edward la Zouche of Harringworth, but was partly destroyed by fire a few years later.
During the Second World War, the mansion was used as a Red Cross maternity home, before becoming the residence of the exiled King Michael and Queen Anne of Romania for a number of years.
It became the location of the Police Staff College in 1960, and was later home to the European Police College.
Bramshill House
Bramshill House is a Jacobean mansion standing on 269 acres (109 ha) of land in the civil parish of Bramshill in northeast Hampshire in England.
It has been the location of the Police Staff College since 1955.
Although there is some uncertainty concerning the supposed scene of this old tragedy, owing to its great antiquity, the researches of historians and antiquarians have proved that it most probably occurred at Bramshill House, in Hampshire, the seat of the very ancient Cope family.
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, who made the most exhaustive study of old English romances and mysteries, writes in his “Strange Pages from Family Papers”:— “The chest in which The Mistletoe Bride was found is shown to visitors at Bramshill House, Hampshire, the residence of Sir John Cope.”
The Mistletoe Bride, Bramshill House
The Mistletoe Bride, Bramshill House
Bramshill House was bought by Lord Zouche, a noted statesman, adventurer and philosopher of the Elizabethan period.
For these reasons the wedding at Bramshill House was one of the greatest and merriest that had ever been known in England.
The Mistletoe Bride, Bramshill House
Marta Andreasen, a UKIP MEP for South East England, wants the EU to stop funding the European Police College (Cepol), which has been based at Bramshill House, in Mansion Drive, near Hook, since 2006.
Cepol was set up in 2006 at Bramshill House, a 17th century Grade I-listed building that is also separately the home of the UK’s National Policing Improvement Agency.
