The Battle of Alexander at Issus

William IV, Duke of Bavaria
William IV
William IV (German: Wilhelm IV; 13 November 1493 – 7 March 1550) was Duke of Bavaria from 1508 to 1550, until 1545 together with his younger brother Louis X, Duke of Bavaria.
William IV of Bavaria
Among other works he commissioned an important suite of paintings from various artists, including the Battle of Issus by Albrecht Altdorfer.
This, like most of William's collection, is now housed in the Alte Pinakothek in Munich.
To the history cycle of the garden pavilion belonged Albrecht Altdorfer's painting.
Wilhelm of Bavaria (17 February 1529 – 22 October 1530)
(Court and Coat of Arms Book of Bavarian Dukes: William IV and Albert V) at the Bavarian State Library
(Albrecht Altdorfer's (circa 1480 -1538) most famous painting, The Battle of Alexander at Issus, known by various similar titles such as Battle of Alexander, Battle of Issus, etc., depicts the Battle of Issus, and Alexander the Great's victory over Darius III of Persia in 333 BC.)
(1529, oil on panel, 158 × 120 cm (62.2 × 47.2 in), currently @ Alte Pinakothek, München.)
Jan Van Eyck (1390-1441), long considered the father of oil painting, was also Flemish.
We will view one panel of the Ghent Altarpiece, on which he had the assistance of his brother Hubert, widely considered the masterpiece of early Flemish painting.
The painting we shall review is his masterpiece.
Albrecht Altdorfer (1480-1538) was a pioneer of landscape art from Regensberg, Germany.
I will present his impressive painting labeled Alexander the Great's victory over Darius, King of Persia; which at the same time it is actually about the defeat of the Turks at the gates of Vienna in 1529.
ALBRECHT ALTDORFER "THE BATTLE OF ISSUS" 1529 (ALTE PINAKOTHEK, MUNICH)
You might have seen 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' before, but can you say what it really depicts?
Learn more about Altdorfer's artistic agenda as we investigate his style and subject in what most consider his crowning masterpiece!
Naturally Stylish: The Style of Albrecht Altdorfer
Whenever it was, you should've probably thanked 16th-century painter Albrecht Altdorfer, seeing as how he was the first artist since antiquity to focus on landscape painting, or the depiction of natural settings in portraiture with an absence of human subjects.
Altdorfer himself is credited as one of the founding members, but there were also several others who became part of what's known as the 'Danube School' (German: Donauschule).
However, we can start to see in the same painting that he was also drawn to large-scale depictions of natural views - and none get much larger than those in Altdorfer's masterpiece: 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus.'
Shifting Focus: Subject in Altdorfer's 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus'
The Battle of Alexander at Issus (1529)
Though not as dizzying as these dramatic camera angles can be, there are also shifts in focus as we examine the subject of 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' - from ancient clashes to contemporary conflicts and even their cosmic ramifications.
Immediately from the title, we can identify the feuding armies depicted in the foreground as those belonging to two Titans of the ancient world: Alexander the Great and Darius III, king of Persia.
The battle scene Altdorfer painted is supposed to illustrate Alexander's victory over Darius at Issus in 333 B.C., which was the turning point that led to the legendary general's complete conquest of Persia three years later.
When Altdorfer was first commissioned to paint 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' in 1528 by Wilhelm IV, Duke of Bavaria, their region of Europe was poised for attack from foreign invaders.
To be exact, these forces belonged to Suleiman the Magnificent, Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, and Altdorfer used his masterpiece to draw parallels between his time and Alexander's.
For Altdorfer, Alexander's victory at Issus - located in present-day Turkey - was the perfect subject to reflect the conflict between East and West in his own day.
We might think it strange that the masterpiece of a landscape painter like Altdorfer would involve human subjects at all.
But if we take a look at the broader canvas of 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' we see that it's easy to lose sight of them amidst the epic landscape which surrounds them.
In fact, 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' is one of the finest examples of a particular type of landscape painting known as 'world landscape' (German: 'Weltlandschaft'), which depicts enormous, panoramic views of the sky and Earth's surface and was favored by Altdorfer and others of the 'Danube School.'
Why Albrecht Altdorfer's masterpiece gives me nightmares
Feasting magnificently on slaughter ... The Battle of Issus by Albrecht Altdorfer.
The Battle of Issus by Albrecht Altdorfer – known in German simply as the Alexanderschlacht or Alexander battle – is a wonder.
It was painted in 1529 as part of a cycle of history paintings commissioned by the duke of Bavaria: today these works hang together in their own room in the Alte Pinakothek in Munich, dominated by the entrancing horror and beauty of Altdorfer's masterpiece.
Connoisseurs of culture wars may note that it portrays a classic confrontation between east and west, when Alexander the Great defeated the Persian king Darius in 333BC.
From the Alte Pinakothek – truly one of Europe's richest art collections – you can walk through Munich to the House of German Art, built for Adolf Hitler, today a benign contemporary venue.
No picture does it more so than Albrecht Altdorfer's Alexander's Victory.
The battle in question is the Battle of Issus, fought in 333BC, in which Alexander the Great defeated Darius III of Persia, near what is now Isk enderun in Turkey.
Albrecht Altdorfer (c1480-1538) is famous for kind of inventing landscape.
Albrecht Altdorfer (1480-1538)
The Northern Renaissance German painter, etcher, engraver, draughtsman and architect, active mainly in Regensburg, Albrecht Altdorfer is best known for his paintings of historical and Biblical subjects, set in atmospheric landscapes, such as Battle of Alexander at Issus (1529, Alte Pinakothek, Munich) and Christ Taking Leave of His Mother (1520, National Gallery, London).
Influenced by Italian Old Masters like Andrea Mantegna (1431-1406), as well as by other Northern Renaissance artists like Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472-1553), and the woodcuts and engravings of Albrecht Durer (1471-1528), Altdorfer was also an influential member of the Danube School (Donauschule) of landscape painting.
His architectural paintings include works like the Italianate A Susanna and the Elders (1526, Alte Pinakothek, Munich) and the topographical Danube Landscape with Castle (c.1520, Alte Pinakothek, Munich).
His chief art patrons were Louis X and William IV, Dukes of Bavaria, and the Habsburg Emperor Maximilan I. Altdorfer died at the age of 57.
Their pioneering interest in capturing the dense German forests, as well as the atmospheric sunsets and moonlight of the region (later depicted so evocatively by Caspar David Friedrich 1774-1840), has led to art historians cataloguing them as the Danube School of landscape painting.
His love of scenery and nature is evident in many of his works, from his early St. George and the Dragon (1510, Alte Pinakothek), to his later Battle of Issus (1529).
Altdorfer's finest history painting and arguably the most famous of all his compositions, is his masterpiece - Battle of Alexander at Issus (1529) - painted for the Bavarian Royal Court.
The culmination of several earlier paintings on the subject of military battles which he had completed for Maximilian I in his illuminated manuscript Triumphal Procession (1512-14), the picture depicts in vivid detail the battle scene at Issus between the armies of Alexander the Great and the Persian Emperor Darius, set amidst a dominating, if somewhat extravagant landscape.
Paintings, etchings and engravings by Albrecht Altdorfer can be seen in several of the world's best art museums including the Alte Pinakothek in Munich and the National Gallery in London.
Albrecht Altdorfer's depiction of the moment in 333 B.C. when Alexander the Great routed Darius III for supremacy in Asia Minor is vast in ambition, sweeping in scope, vivid in imagery, rich in symbols, and obviously heroic—the Iliad of painting, as literary critic Friedrich Schlegel suggested.
But Altdorfer (1480-1538) and his masterpiece are something of an art-world secret.
Like "The Battle of Issus," which hangs in Munich's Alte Pinakothek, most are owned by European museums.
"He prised landscape out of a mere supplementary relationship to subject-matter," wrote Yale scholar Christopher Wood in "Albrecht Altdorfer and the Origins of Landscape" (1993).
The work was commissioned in 1528 by Wilhelm IV, Duke of Bavaria, the first in a cycle of eight historical battle scenes destined to hang in the Residenz in Munich.
His inscription was originally written in German "in golden capital letters," according to the Alte Pinakothek, and his banner was twice its current height.
Altdorfer finished the painting in 1529; late that year, Suleiman was turned back at the Siege of Vienna.
Albrecht Altdorfer (1482-1538)
The battle between Alexander the Great and the Persian King Darius III at Issus in 333 B.C. signalled the end of the Persian advance.
The Battle of Alexander at Issus by Albrecht Altdorfer
The Battle of Alexander at Issus, known by various similar titles such as Battle of Alexander, Battle of Issus etc. is Albrecht Altdorfer's (c. 1480 -1538) most famous painting.
The oil-on-canvas depicts the Battle of Issus, and Alexander the Great's victory of Darius III of Persia in 333 BC.
It was commissioned by the Duke of Bavaria and passed from the Bavarian royal collection to the Alte Pinakothek in Munich.
Detail of Alexander the Great in the battle.
The Battle of Alexander at Issus is one of the most epic pieces of art you may ever lay eyes on.
It was painted by Albrecht Altdorfer in 1529 after being commissioned by Duke William IV of Bavaria.
It shows Alexander the Great’s resounding victory over Darius III of Persia at the Battle of Issus which took place in 333 BC.
It was the decisive battle of the Macedonian king’s subjegation of the Persian Empire.
Albrecht Altdorfer (c. 1480—1538) — a German painter, engraver and architect of the Renaissance.
The man behind the masterpiece, Albrecht Altdorfer, was born in 1480 in Bavaria, either in Regensburg or the town of Altdorf.
Some of his works are considered by some to be the first landscape paintings, in the modern sense.
The battle of Alexander at Issus shows the battle of Alexander the Great against the troops of the Persian Empire under the command of their king, Darius III, in 333 BC.
The battle culminates in the victory of Alexander and prevents Muslims to conquer the west.
In 1529, the ottomans sieged Vienna in their greatest advance in Europe, but they were eventually defeated.
With this painting, Altdorfer’s only intention is to show us the heroic achievement of the army of Alexander the Great against the foreign barbarians, and therefore he does not mind using symbols, anachronisms and, even, wrong information.
The sign at the top reads: “Alexander the Great defeating the last Darius, after 100,000 infantry and more than 10,000 cavalrymen had been killed amongst the ranks of the Persians.
Albrecht Altdorfer
Altdorfer’s masterpiece, the “Battle of Alexander at Issus” (1529; Alte Pinakothek, Munich), is both a battle scene of incredible detail and a highly dramatic and expressive landscape.
The Battle of Alexander at Issus is Albrecht Altdorfer's (c. 1480 -1538) most famous oil painting.
Painted in 1528-9, the oil painting depicts a young Alexander the Great in 333 BC, at the point of victory over the Persian army of King Darius III in the Battle of Issus.
The work was commissioned by the Duke of Bavaria and passed from the Bavarian royal collection to the Alte Pinakothek in Munich.
Albrecht Altdorfer made significant developments in landscape and etching.
He was also an architect, an engraver, and the leader of the Danube school of German painting.
The Heavenly Host above the Virgin and Child in the Isenheim Altarpiece has been compared to The Battle of Alexander at Issus.
This is shown in The Battle of Alexander at Issus by the strange night sky.
Despite, or because of lying outside his usual range, the oil painting has become his most famous work.
He signed the painting with a monogram in the lower left hand corner, dating it 1529, and also inscribed it: "ALBRECHT ALTORFER ZU REGENSPVRG FECIT" on the bottom edge of the banner panel in the sky.
Even though the battle took place in modern Turkey, in the oil painting the Alps and what are obviously German cities can be clearly made out,[2] as the amount of the earth that could be seen from a very high view-point is hugely exaggerated.
The battle itself was a tactical triumph for Alexander, and probably his most famous victory.
However, the inscriptions on the oil painting, probably supplied by Aventin, the Bavarian court historian, refer to much larger numbers.
Detail showing Alexander the Great.The subject is explained in the banner sign hanging down from the sky in the painting, originally in German but replaced at an unknown date by a Latin inscription that translates as: "Alexander the Great defeating the last Darius, after 100,000 infantry and more than 10,000 cavalrymen had been killed amongst the ranks of the Persians.
In addition Alexander and Darius are identified by tiny inscriptions on their harness and chariot respectively, and banners carried by the armies have further inscriptions.The oil painting was ordered by Duke William IV of Bavaria.
as one of the initial three in a series of eight depicting battles during classical antiquity ordered by William IV Five of these oil paintings are still found in the Pinakothek, while the remaining three are today located in the Nationalmuseum in Stockholm, having been looted by the Swedish army in the Thirty Years War.
These eight oil paintings celebrating male heroes were eventually accompanied by eight other paintings celebrating female heroes from both the Bible and antiquity.
The oil painting was one of many taken back to Paris by Napoleon, and its fame largely dates from this period.
The presence of the two celestial bodies reflects the cosmic dimensions ascribed to the battle, and supported by a Biblical quote describing the event as a part of God's plan for mankind - where the kingdom of Alexander the Great was succeeded by the Roman Empire, in turn succeeded by the German Holy Roman Empire.
The armour that most or all of the soldiers wear is unmistakably that of the 16th century.The work uses a complex and impossible bird's-eye view, which starts relatively close to the ground at the front of the oil painting, but rises to hundreds of feet for the background.
Image The Battle of Alexander at Issus
1529; Limewood panel, 158.4 x 120.3 cm; Alte Pinakothek, Munich
Image The Battle of Alexander at Issus (detail)
Image The Battle of Alexander at Issus (detail)
Its subject is the victory of the young Alexander the Great in 333 B.C. over the Persian army of King Darius III in the battle of Issus.
Without the text on the tablet suspended in the sky and the inscriptions on the banners, we could not possibly identify the subject, Alexander's victory over Darius.
The tiny soldiers of The Battle of Alexander at Issus have their counterpart in his other late pictures, and he painted at least one landscape with no figures at all--the earliest "pure" landscape we know of since antiquity.
Mosaic, what can be a copy of that masterpiece, was found in a 1830 in a “House of the Faun” in Pompei.
Albrecht Altdorfer
“Alexanderschlacht” – or “The Battle of Alexander at Issus”, is the next in our serie.
Albrecht Altdorfer was an iconic German painter, printmaker, engraver, drafter and architect of the Renaissance era.
Find out information on childhood, life and timeline of Albrecht Altdorfer in this biography.
Albrecht Altdorfer Biography - Childhood, Life And Timeline
Albrecht Altdorfer was an iconic German painter, printmaker, engraver, drafter and architect of Renaissance era who is best celebrated as the creator of the scariest painting in the world, “The Battle of Issus”.
He is considered one of the founders of landscape paintings, one who established landscapes as one of the independent genres of painting.
Albrecht Altdorfer’s Childhood And Early Life
This also made him the leader of the Danube school in West Germany.
For Duke William IV of Bavaria, he painted “The Battle of Alexander at Issus” in 1529.
In 1529-30, he was entrusted with the charges of city fortification in the light of an anticipated Turkish attack.
The “work” was “The Battle of Alexander at Issus.”
Owing to Albrecht Altdorfer’s contributions, the reputation of Danube School reached sky high and was considered of being ahead of its time.
Two of his finest landscape paintings are,” Landscape with Footbridge” of 1518-1520, which is said to be the first pure landscape in oil and “View of the Danube Valley near Regensburg”.
The masterpieces of his expressionistic religious arts are “The Legend of St. Sebastian” and “The Passion of Christ” of the so-called Sebastian Altar in St. Florian's Priory (Stift Sankt Florian) near Linz, Austria.
“The Battle of Alexander at Issus” was commissioned by William IV, Duke of Bavaria, as a part of a series of eight historical battle scenes to be hung in the Residenz in Munich.
In his painting of “The Battle of Alexander at Issus,” Altdorfer delineates the moment in 333 B.C. when Alexander the great thrashed Darius III in a battle for supremacy in Asia Minor.
Albrecht Altdorfer was a renowned print maker with myriad engravings and almost ninety-three woodcuts.
Albrecht Altdorfer died on 12 February at Regensburg in the year 1538.
Today, a large fraction of his body of work can be seen at the Alte Pinakothek Museum in Munich,and in the National Gallery of London.
Albrecht Altdorfer was born
1529:
For Duke William IV of Bavaria he painted “The Battle of Alexander at Issus.”
1529-30:
