Belton House

Visiting Belton House
Victoria, here, inviting you to come along on a visit to Belton House, sometimes chosen as the penultimate example of the perfect English Country House.
Belton House in Lincolnshire (south  front, above) was built in the late 17th century for Sir John Brownlow (1659-97); although the house was once attributed to Sir Christopher Wren, the architect was probably William Winde (d. 1722).
©National Trust
Belton remained in the Brownlow-Cust family for three hundred years before Edward John Peregrine Cust, 7th Baron Brownlow, gave the house to the National Trust in 1985.
For more information in Belton House, click here.
© National Trust
In the 1995 film version of Pride and Prejudice, Belton House played the role of Rosings, the estate of Lady Catherine de Bourgh.
Above, the North Front of Belton House; below, the view of the garden from the steps.
Unfortunately Belton House is no longer accepting bookings for marquees.
The National Trust’s Belton House has got to be considered as one of the Countries premier wedding venues with landscaped gardens, maginificent house and marquee receptions in the grounds.
Belton House itself is really something special, a jewel in The Nation Trusts crown, it epitomises all that is grand and regal in British architecture.
Set in stunning formal gardens with backdrops of fountains, follies, lakes, avenues and parkland, Belton House really is the perfect setting for a perfect wedding.
Photograph opportunities are countless and include not only the fabulous state rooms of the House proper and the acres of formal and natural gardens, but also the quaint painted boat house, regal orangery and a myriad of other perfectly placed follies and idyllic settings.
Belton House is licensed to hold civil wedding ceremonies to be conducted by the local Registrar.
Time for photographs in Belton House Gardens.
Wonderful vistas and viewpoints including the perfect symmetry of the Italian Garden, timeless topiary of the Dutch Garden, lush foliage of the Orangery and, of course, the magnificent backdrop of Belton House.
We can pretty much tailor your day to suit you, there are certain restrictions on ceremony and access times imposed by the National Trust, but all other elements are optional.
the ultimate wedding in the finest country house:
• Your carriage arrives to take you in style and elegance to the grandeur of Belton House and the splendour of the Marble Hall for your ceremony.
• Time for photographs in Belton House Gardens; stunning vistas, formal gardens, fountains, follies, lakes and avenues all await you to leave lasting memories of your perfect day.
Belton House
The front facade Dressing up in period costumes The church and formal gardens A quiet nook in the Italianate gardens The Orangery Statuary in the garden
The grand entrance to Belton House
The Brownlow family acquired the estate in 1617, and the current manor was built from 1685-88 for 'Young' Sir John Brownlow.
The Brownlow and Cust families owned the house for over 300 years before it passed to the National Trust in 1984.
The formal gardens and Belton church
The house is set in 36 acres of Italian and Dutch formal gardens, and huge informal gardens.
The combination of the formal gardens with the Orangery and church together make for an unforgettable sight.
There's a lot to keep kids occupied at Belton House.
About Belton House
Website: Belton House
National Trust - see also: National Trust memberships (official website link)
Haunting Of The Queen’s Bedroom: Belton House
The Queen’s bedroom at Belton House is supposedly stalked by “the gentleman in black”.
The present house was built between 1685 and 1688, by Sir John Brownlow and his wife.
Despite their wealth they decided to build a modest country house instead of a grand palace.
Yet inside their home it still had all of the latest innovations.
In 1984 they gave their house to the National Trust, who also with the help of National Heritage Fund brought most of the house contents and 1.317 acres of parkland, at the cost of 8 million pounds.
In April 2008, Thomas Thornton went to Belton House to have a look around but got there a little early so the door's were not open to the public yet.
Belton House, Lincolnshire
In the late 17th century, having inherited most of his great-uncle's wealth as well as his estate at Belton, Sir John Brownlow decided to build a new country house for his family.
Several architects have been associated with Belton House, including Sir Christopher Wren, but it is more feasible that William Winde and William Stanton were largely responsible for the design and construction of the property, possibly seeking advice from Roger Pratt.
After a slow start, Belton House took less than four years to complete, Sir John and Lady Brownlow moving in during November 1688.
Although several rooms underwent a number of functional changes throughout the 300 years it belonged to the Brownlow family, Belton House today represents a perfect example of a neo-Caroline English country house.
This vast H-shaped residence was given a major refurbishment at the hands of Sir Jeffrey Wyatville in the early 19th century, but the 3rd Earl was responsible for the remodelling programme later that century that restored much of the original Caroline splendour to Belton House.
There are over 200 pictures on public display, a large proportion of them being late 17th century portraits, a sizeable collection of porcelain and silver, and an impressive array of Regency furniture throughout the many rooms of Belton House.
In the east wing of Belton House, the Chapel, Drawing Room and Gallery retain their 17th century interiors almost intact, and the Chapel itself contains a stunning reredos of the same period.
The Yellow Bedroom survives as one of the James Wyatt interiors, dating from the 1770s, and the Queens Bedroom has been restored to its original appearance of 1841 when Queen Adelaide stayed at Belton House.
No country house worthy of note is complete without a setting of formal gardens, sculptured parkland, water features and parterres.
Little has survived of the spectacular baroque garden created for Sir John Brownlow but Wyatville's classical plans have left Belton House with a magnificent Italian Garden, fountain and Orangery.
The grounds alone require a few hours to fully appreciate their beauty and expanse, but to take in a tour of Belton House as well a whole day should be allowed.
Belton House remained in the Brownlow family until 1984, when it was given to the National Trust.
Three miles northeast of Grantham Belton House is a beautiful example of a James Wyatt restoration (in 1770s) of a late 17th century manor home.
This house was built for Sir John Brownlow and was originally designed by Roger Pratt.
The formal gardens include an orangery, a woodland adventure playground and the Bellmount tower.
Belton House
Belton House, located near Grantham, Lincolnshire, England ,was built between 1685 and 1688 for "Young" Sir John Brownlow.
In 1679, he inherited the Belton estates from his great-uncle Sir John Brownlow, 1st Baronet of Belton.
When Sir John inherited the property from his great-uncle, he decided to build a new country house on the property.
Belton House is an example of the Carolean style, which is also known as the Restoration style.
Belton House features a "double pile" plan with a saloon at the center of the house.
Closer to the house, there were formal gardens that featured symmetrical walks and canal ponds.
Belton House was in the Brownlow family for over 300 years.
Like many members of the aristocracy, the Brownlows had financial problems following World War I.
In 1984, the 7th Baron of Belton transferred ownership to the National Trust, which continues to operate the house as a historic site.
Since becoming a National Trust site, Belton House has been used as a film location in several mini-series.
Belton House Gardens
Belton House and its 35 acre garden are now managed by the National Trust.
Website Visit the Belton House Gardens website
Item institution: National Trust, Belton House
Details: The library collections at Belton, Lincolnshire, are among the finest in any National Trust house.
This copy of Britannia, which had been sold from Belton House before the National Trust acquired the property in 1983, has the bookplate of Sir John Brownlow, Baron Charleville and Viscount Tyrconnel, and a Belton House label.
Sir Richard Cust, 2nd baronet (1680-1734), married in 1717 Anne Brownlow, sister of Sir John Brownlow, 5th baronet, who was created Viscount Tyrconnel in 1718.
Through this marriage the Cust family inherited part of the estates of Sir John Brownlow, 3rd baronet (d. 1697) of Belton (Lincolnshire).
Belton House II the Interior
That, apparently, is very close to the French manner of planning a country house, like Le Vau's Vaux-le-Vicomte.
The paneling is a throwback to the Tudor period.
Belton House (NT), Grantham, Lincs
The perfect English country house?
Built for Sir John Brownlow in the 1680s, Belton House has all the design features of a classic English country home.
Sitting in formal Italian and Dutch gardens and an historic 1300 acre deer park, Belton is often cited as the quintessential country house estate.
The cottage is 30min from Belton House.
Belton House
Seeing as this has the National Trust's largest adventure playground, you might find it hard to drag the kids away to see one of the finest restoration houses in the country.
Belton House includes formal gardens, an orangery, a landscape park and the aforementioned large adventure playground...maybe best not to mention this until they've been in the house.
Belton House
A lovely National Trust property.
Belton House has a fantastic outdoor play area, suitable for all ages.
We use our annual family membership for the National Trust, which is a bargain.
Belton House
When you come out of the adventure playground, theres formal gardens behind the Belton House mansion, where there is a massive fountain and pond, and beyond that, a huge original green-house with lovely rare flowers in.
Belton House
Belton House
Lots of flat space for ball games, also formal gardens, maze, woodland walk and short mini train ride (costs £1 per person).
Belton House, NG32 2LS Grantham
The perfect English country house estate?
Set in its own extensive deer park, Belton is owned by the National Trust.
Built in the late 17th century for 'Young' Sir John Brownlow it is one of the finest examples of Restoration
Belton House
Belton HouseBelton House is a beautiful classic restoration masterpiece built between 1685 and 1688 for Sir John Brownlow, the 3rd Baron of Great Humby.
The 7th Baron Brownlow gave Belton to The National Trust in 1984.
The stable block is of classic country house proportions and looks very solid.
The author Edith Wharton was so taken by Belton House that she had a miniature version of it built in Massachusetts.
Jane Austen Film and TV Locations: Belton House Part 1
August 17, 2010 in BBC, Belton House, Country House Visiting/Tourism, Film and TV Locations, Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice | Tags: Colin Firth, Jane Austen, Jennifer Ehle, locations, Pride and Prejudice
Belton House has become rather popular as a film location in the past few years.
It is now a National Trust property but for 300 years it was the home of the Brownlow and then the Cust families, influential Lincolnshire landowners whose families intermarried with the Dukes of Ancaster at Grimsthorpe and the Cecils of Burghley House.
It was commissioned by “Young” Sir John Brownlow, seen here as he appears in his portrait which still hangs in the formal saloon of the house.
We first see the north front of Belton House as it is being approached by  the clearly terrified Sir William and  Maria Lucas, a sanguine Elizabeth Bennet and Charlotte Collins(nee Lucas)and a fretfully boastful Mr Collins.
The ground to the east of the house gradually rises to the Belmount Tower, along an avenue of what was once elm trees and are now Turkey oaks.This building  cannot now be accessed though the grounds  and park of Belton House but it was once very much part of it.
In the evening we went  to Belton House, the seat of Lady Cust.
Two things relative to it we were desired to remember viz that the original of sash windows was at the erecting of this edifice in Charles I’s time: the second that from a temple in the garden called Belle Mount you may see seven counties at once, a thing from one spot thought very remarkable…
