Buildings and architecture of Bristol

There is the Rockfish Grill and Seafood Market on Whiteladies Road, considered one of the city’s best fish restaurants, and the Avon Gorge Hotel, which has spectacular views of the Clifton Suspension Bridge.
Bristol ( /ˈbrɪstəl/) is a city, unitary authority and county in South West England with an estimated 2014 population of 437,500.
[48] The city was associated with Victorian engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel, who designed the Great Western Railway between Bristol and London Paddington, two pioneering Bristol-built oceangoing steamships (the SS Great Britain and the SS Great Western), and the Clifton Suspension Bridge.
The 20th century relocation of the docks to Avonmouth Docks and Royal Portbury Dock, 7 miles (11 km) downstream from the city centre, has allowed the redevelopment of the old dock area (the Floating Harbour).
St Mary Redcliffe church and the Floating Harbour, Bristol
Brunel's Clifton Suspension Bridge.
[126] Bristol's March 2007 unemployment rate was 4.8%, compared with four percent for South West England and the national average of 5.5%.
During the mid-19th century Bristol Byzantine, a style unique to the city, was developed and several examples have survived.
Ashton Gate Stadium, with the Clifton Suspension Bridge over the Avon Gorge in the background
The city has a number of urban cycle routes and links with National Cycle Network routes to Bath, London, Gloucester, Wales and South West England.
Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
But now the Clifton Suspension Bridge has been voted one of the UK's best-loved roadside landmarks.
Bristol’s Floating Harbour
In 1809 Bristol was transformed by the opening of the Floating Harbour.
Dig to reveal city's medieval era
Trustees of the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum in Bristol, which has now closed, are in talks with about six of the owners about compensation.
The museum opened in 2002 in Isambard Kingdom Brunel's original Temple Meads station and won a string of awards.
Isambard Kingdom Brunel  (1806–1859)
Isambard Kingdom Brunel is celebrated as an engineering genius.
Born on 9 April 1806 in Portsea near Portsmouth, Isambard Kingdom Brunel was the third child of Marc Brunel, a French émigré engineer and English mother Sophie Kingdom.
Both were designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel and built in Bristol and at their time were respectively the largest bridge and the largest ship in the world.
Bristol’s most striking example of the famous ‘Bristol Byzantine’ warehouse style
The region of South West England includes the counties of Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Dorset, Somerset, Devon and Cornwall.
