Cloud Gate

Millennium Park - Art & Architecture
Visit Millennium Park today and enjoy an unprecedented combination of stunning architecture, sculpture and landscape design located in the heart of downtown Chicago.
Chase Promenade
Frank Gehry, winner of the National Medal of Art and the designer of the Jay Pritzker Pavilion and BP Bridge, applied his signature style to Millennium Park’s revolutionary outdoor concert venue.
Cloud Gate is British artist Anish Kapoor's first public outdoor work installed in the United States.
The 110-ton elliptical sculpture is forged of a seamless series of highly polished stainless steel plates, which reflect Chicago’s famous skyline and the clouds above.
Cloud Gate sits upon the AT&T Plaza, which was made possible by a gift from AT&T.
About the Artist: Anish Kapoor
Designed by Spanish artist Jaume Plensa, the Crown Fountain in Millennium Park is a major addition to the city's world-renowned public art collection.
The towers project video images from a broad social spectrum of Chicago citizens, a reference to the traditional use of gargoyles in fountains, where faces of mythological beings were sculpted with open mouths to allow water, a symbol of life, to flow out.
Plensa adapted this practice by having faces of Chicago citizens projected on LED screens and having water flow through an outlet in the screen to give the illusion of water spouting from their mouths.
The collection of faces, Plensa's tribute to Chicagoans, was taken from a cross-section of 1,000 residents.
Designed by Gustafson Guthrie Nichol Ltd, Piet Oudolf and Robert Israel, this five acre garden pays homage to the City's motto, "Urbs in Horto" (City in a Garden), which refers to Chicago's transformation from its flat and marshy origins to a bold and powerful city.
Located on the corner of Michigan Avenue and Randolph Street, the tree-lined area of Wrigley Square in Millennium Park is an inviting open space for visitors to relax on the lawn or stroll paths.
Etched in stone on the base of the Millennium Monument in Wrigley Square are the names of the founders of Millennium Park.
These individuals, corporations and foundations provided generous monetary contribution for the creation and conservation of Millennium Park.
The formal Boeing Galleries in Millennium Park are a home for modern and contemporary art, where visitors can directly experience the work and ideas of living artists.
Connecting Millennium Park to Daley Bicentennial Plaza, east of the park, this 925-foot-long winding bridge, Gehry's first, provides incomparable views of the Chicago skyline, Grant Park and Lake Michigan.
The McDonald's Cycle Center in Millennium Park has something for everyone: bicycle rentals, bike tours and Segway Tours, plus lockers, showers, bike repair, and other amenities designed to encourage biking to the Park and other downtown locations.
Bicycle Rental: Bikes are available for rent by the hour, day, or week by Chicago Bike and Roll.
Guided Bicycle Tours: Memorial Day to Labor Day, guided bicycle tours are offered daily at 10am and 1pm by Chicago Bike and Roll.
IGO Car Sharing : IGO cars are available for rent from Millennium Park.
From September to May, the non-profit Harris Theater partners with Chicago’s performing arts and cultural institutions, bringing music and dance to the public.
It is proud to be the home of Chicago’s most exciting music and dance companies, including Chicago Opera Theater, Music of the Baroque and Hubbard Street Dance Chicago.
The theater is located at 205 E. Randolph Street, next to the Millennium Park Welcome Center.
The four Exelon Pavilions, which use state-of-the art technology to convert solar energy into electricity, are an integral part of Chicago’s efforts to become the most environmentally-friendly city in North America.
Together, the Pavilions provide enough electricity annually to power 14 star-rated energy-efficient houses in Chicago.
The northwest pavilion houses the Millennium Park Welcome Center, along with an Exelon energy display area.
The two Exelon Pavilions on the Park's south end also provide access to the Millennium Park Garage, and were designed by architect Renzo Piano.
Chase Promenade
A three-block-long walkway lined by nearly 200 trees, the Chase Promenade spans the center of Millennium Park from Monroe to Randolph streets.
Chicagoans and visitors are invited to enjoy exhibitions, festivals and other family events on these eight acres of the Park.
The Chase Promenade was made possible through a gift from the Bank One Foundation.
The Nichols Bridgeway, the newest addition to Millennium Park is the 625-foot pedestrian bridge that links the Park to The Art Institute of Chicago’s Modern Wing.
Illinois.
Cloud Gate in Downtown Chicago
Souvenirs › North America › United States › Illinois › Acrylic Fridge Magnet: United States.
Illinois.
Cloud Gate in Downtown Chicago
The Bold Sculpture Of Cloud Gate In Chicago Illinois Pictured On An Acrylic Fridge Magnet
Anish Kapoor’s incredible Cloud Gate Sculpture is a fitting centre piece for the AT&T Plaza.
During the winter months, from mid-November to mid-March, the plaza can also be used as a place to view McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink; the rink attracts approximately one hundred thousand skaters each open period.
The Works Of Art Of Chicago, Illinois
The Cloud Gate Sculpture is not the only work of art in Chicago worth seeing.
Outside the Daley Center in Chicago is a statue by the world famous Pablo Picasso.
Interview with Sculptor Anish Kapoor
And it's just one example of what Anish Kapoor considers art.
COREN (voiceover): Known for manipulating form and perspective, the Mumbai-born British artist has fascinated the public with his bean-shaped sculpture in Chicago's Millennium Park, turned New York's Rockefeller Center upside-down with his 11 meter Sky Mirror, and dwarfed art fans with his enormous installation of Marsyas, in London.
COREN (voiceover): This week, on "Talk Asia", we meet Anish Kapoor in Seoul, as he brings his eye-catching pieces to the East.
COREN: Anish Kapoor, welcome to "Talk Asia".
COREN: Cloud Gate, which is truly stunning, it's officially known as "The Bean" in Chicago.
KAPOOR: The good citizens of Chicago have a civic pride like one rarely sees.
I don't think there are many cities where there is that commitment to the community and to the city as there is in Chicago.
KAPOOR: Indeed, and so it comes to have a colloquial name, you know, "The Bean", etcetera, etcetera.
The more you study it, the clearer it is that Anish Kapoor and Cecil Balmond have come up with, I think, a truly magnificent piece of public art.
Anish Kapoor, a pleasure to meet you.
Cloud Gate, located within the Millennium Park area of the Loop community in down-town Chicago has to be one of the top, free, public interactive sculptures in the world.
Film locations: Quebec; Chicago
Film locations: Quebec; Chicago
Chicago: Flights: O'Hare International Airport
CTA (Chicago Transit Authority) maps
Millennium Park was the location for Chicagoan Barack Obama’s 2008 victory rally.
Set in Chicago, the movie was made almost entirely in Montreal, using eye-watering amounts of CGI, most of which you won’t even have realised.
Despite the claims of several Chicago area rail stops, ‘Glenbrook Station’ is not real.
A small section of the platform was constructed in a park in Montreal, but everything else is computer generated – based on the design of Orland Park Station, about 25 miles southwest of Chicago.
Apart from the aerial shots of the city and the Metra line entering the South Loop, the only actual Chicago location is the surreal mirrored sculpture seen at the end of the film.
Anish Kapoor’s amazing Cloud Gate (affectionately dubbed The Bean) can be found at AT&T Plaza in Millennium Park.
Totally upstaging Frank Gehry’s nearby Pritzker Pavilion, the 2006 sculpture is made up of 168 stainless steel plates, welded together with no visible seams.
The newly remodelled entrance to the Metra station at Millennium Park itself was used for the emergence of the Batpod in Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight.
Of course a restaurant located directly under Cloud Gate (The Bean!)
I was expecting an overcrowded and overpriced experience at Park Grill, but ultimately choose it for dinner with friends who were coming in on the Metra to Millennium Station.
Everyone in my party was happy with their meals (we had a few of the salad options, a Park Grill burger, truffle fries, and calamari).
Cloud Gate aka The Bean
A cache by Greenback Message this owner	Hidden : 07/20/2004	In Illinois, United States
Is lovingly known as the Bean in Chicago and is one of the main attractions at Millennium Park.
It's a monumental public sculpture by Anish Kapoor which weighs in at 110 tons.
Named Cloud Gate by the artist, it's a stainless steel sculpture designed to reflect the Chicago skyline, the new park and everything around it.
Currently the seams are visible but when finished it will be a seamless reflection of the Chicago Skyline and anyone standing nearby.
You can view Cloud Gate (visit link) by web cam and see some magnificent views of the sculpture and Millennium Park.
Chicago, Illinois
Visitors take their best Chicago photographs in front of the iconic Millennium Park sculpture called Cloud Gate and known colloquially as “The Bean.”
Designed by Anish Kapoor and constructed from 168 stainless steel plates with no visible seams, the polished surfaces of this 33ft tall sculpture reflect infinite variations of the Chicago skyline.
Artist: Anish Kapoor
Located: Millenium Park, Chicago, Illinois
Weighs: 110 short tons
Nicknamed: "The Bean" & "The Electric Kidney Bean"
Embraced as the new symbol of Chicago
"Math at Millennium Park."
Millennium Park.
Final Transit 3 Facts about Chicagos Cloud Gate That
"Cloud Gate, Chicago."
Chicago Architecture Info.
Across Michigan Avenue at the beginning of Chicago's Millennium Park, you'll find Park Grill, a place both familiar and unlike anywhere else.
Any time of the year, practically any time of day, Park Grill sets the table for remarkable experiences.
Visit the Park Shop and find fantastic souvenirs of Millennium Park, Chicago's award-winning landmark.
Park Grill offers a variety of dining and entertainment experiences in Millennium Park.
The seasonal menu brings a chef's interpretation to classic American cuisine, infusing it with complex seasonal ingredients and distinctive Chicago flavor.
The Plaza at Park Grill is the city's largest al fresco dining venue.
It is the ultimate room with a view, and an experience like no other in Chicago.
The Plaza at Park Grill also serves up some of the city's finest live entertainment.
Adjacent to Park Grill, Park Café is a perfect grab-and-go spot for a picnic in the park or lunch back at the office.
Adjacent to Park Grill is Park Shop.
Park Shop features park-related products, including Frank Gehry limited-edition fine art, Chicago art, history and architecture books, maps and guides, gifts, apparel, botanic spa products, stationary and souvenirs.
Park Grill concessions are located throughout Millennium Park, offering non-alcoholic beverages, Chicago-style pizza and hot dogs, ice cream, and other treats for snacking in the park.
Park Grill opened its doors as the first official resident of Millennium Park on November 24, 2003.
Park Grill is available for private dining parties.
Jim Horan and Matthew O'Malley have more than 33 years of collective experience in entrepreneurial ventures with particular expertise in launching and growing a portfolio of successful restaurant and hospitality Chicago-based businesses – Blue Plate, Chicago's premier boutique-style catering company; Tesori Restaurant located at Adams & Wabash and adjacent to Symphony Center; The Chicago Firehouse Restaurant on South Michigan Avenue (located in an actual historic Chicago firehouse); and Grace O'Malley's on the city's south Michigan Avenue.
On July 16, 2004, the City of Chicago formally opened Millennium Park.
Millennium Park's design includes the Jay Pritzker Pavilion - a performing arts pavilion designed by internationally renowned architect Frank Gehry, as well as the AT&T Plaza featuring Anish Kapoor's 110-ton Cloud Gate sculpture.
Commonly known as "the Bean", the sculpture is forged of a series of highly polished stainless steel plates, which reflect the city's famous skyline and the clouds above.
The Crown Fountain, designed by Spanish artist Jaume Plensa, features two 50-foot-high glass block towers projecting the faces of 1,000 Chicagoans as water gushes from their mouths into a shallow reflecting pool.
Best Restaurant for Business – Crain's Chicago Business, 2010
Best View of the Cityscape – TimeOut Chicago, May 2009
Best Non-Beef Burger – Chicago Magazine, August 2009
#5 Best Outdoor Space – Chicago Social magazine, July 2009
Top Spot for Soup – Crain's Chicago Business, February 2008.
One of Chicago's Favorite Restaurants – Chicago Collection, Fall/Winter 2007.
#3 Best Burger – TimeOut Chicago, February 2007.
– Chicago's Official Visitors Guide, Fall 2009
It's tough to beat this Chicago's prime outdoor dining venue.
– Chicago Tribune, June 2008
– Choose Chicago, Winter 2008
Anish Kapoor’s Cloud Gate
Millennium Park, Chicago, Illinois, 2005
Join in at "The Bean" on Fridays, November 28-December 19.
Twinkling lights, the skyline at night and Chicago's iconic sculpture, "the Bean" in Millennium Park, set a sparkling backdrop to holiday caroling every Friday evening, November 28 - December 19, 2014.
Local Chicago choral groups lead hundreds of celebrants in song for 50-minute acts beginning at 6:00pm.
Millennium Park
201 E. Randolph St. Chicago, IL 60601
Following Caroling at Cloud Gate, which takes place along Chase Promenade Central, head a few steps down to the McCormick Tribune Plaza for a spin on the Millennium Park ice rink.
Friday, December 5 - Lutheran Choir of Chicago
Friday, December 12 - Chicago Chamber Choir
The Chicago Cloud Gate
First Time In Chicago
It’s our first day out in Chicago and we’re in Millennium Park, awestruck at The Cloud Gate Sculpture, designed by British artist, Anish Kapoor.
It’s more commonly referred to as, ‘The Bean’ because of its kidney bean shape.
Standing before this giant, bulbous mirror that wraps the entire Chicago skyline around you is hypnotic; you behave like a child.
Whether Anish Kapoor completely predicted the effect or not, it’s kind of genius.
We really should head off to see more of Chicago now.
Everyone pictures the jellybean when they hear Chicago and Anish Kapoors art does not disappoint!
The Bean
Cloud Gate is a large public sculpture which was first unveiled at the opening of Millennium Park in 2004.
It soon became one of the city's most photographed attractions, and is now one a famous symbol of Chicago.
The Cloud Gate further cemented Chicago's reputation of a city at the forefront of public art and follows in the footsteps of earlier well-known public installations such as Alexander Calder's Flamingo at Federal Center, Picasso's untitled sculpture at the City Hall and Jean Dubuffet's Monument with Standing Beast at the James R. Thompson Center.
Even before it was given an official title, Chicagoans were quick to dub the reflective steel sculpture 'the Bean' after its peculiar shape and the name stuck.
Cloud Gate was the first public sculpture of Indian-born and London-based artist Anish Kapoor.
His work was selected out of two proposals that were submitted in 1999 for a showpiece sculpture in the new, modern Millennium Park, which was scheduled to open in 2000.
When the new Millennium Park was officially inaugurated in 2004 after a four year delay, the city was eager to show the sculpture to the public, as it had spent the hefty sum of 23 million dollars on what was to become one of the highlights of the park.
As expected, many Chicagoans were highly critical and dismissed the unfinished 'Bean' as a piece of metal.
Cloud Gate instantly became an icon of Chicago, and an attraction that every visitor to the city wants to see.
Chicago is a city full of surprises.
As a native Chicagoan, I’m not surprised — our city is such a diverse and unique place that it really does have something for everyone.
Chicago never stops amazing me!
spots here is the famous Cloud Gate (aka “The Bean”).
Early one morning, Soraya and I had the pleasure of having “The Bean” to ourselves and the experience was breath-taking!
I couldn’t believe we had The Bean ALL TO OURSELVES!
The early bird gets the worm (or in this case The Bean)!
Chicago's Cloud Gate - the 'Bean there, done that' debate
I love the Bean in Millennium Park.
Cloud Gate's artist Anish Kapoor is reportedly considering legal action against the Chinese oil town of Karamay for its big shiny sculpture of the local liquid black stuff.
The Bean is - it's written in its contract.
They were obviously taking this Millennium Park thing seriously.
Can't have been easy bending, shaping and welding together 168 stainless steel plates and then sanding the seams down to give the Bean's smooth-as-a-baby's-bottom look.
The Bean isn't - it was supposed to be the centerpiece of the nearby Lurie Garden.
But the planners decided the gardens would end up being trampled, so it proudly sits on what is now called AT&T Plaza.
The Bean is not exactly as light as a cloud at 110 short tons.
The Bean does apparently - the former office of its general foreman during the construction process.
What does your Chicago sound like?
