Beaune Altarpiece

Rogier van der Weyden
Rogier van der Weyden Page's Content
Rogier van der Weyden never signed any of his paintings, but scholars know a man of this name was living and painting in Belgium during the 1400s and have worked in recent years to identify paintings that were most likely created by him.
Rogier van der Weyden Biography
Due to loose record keeping and the devastating effects of World War II bombings, uncovering information about Rogier van der Weyden has posed a real challenge for art historians and scholars.
Rogier van der Weyden was born around 1399, the son of a knife manufacturer, Henri de le Pasture, and his wife, Agnes de Watrelos.
Records indicate that a certain Rogelet de le Pasture (a French translation of Rogier van der Weyden) was the apprentice of the mysterious Master of Flémalle, possibly identifiable as Robert Campin.
Beaune Altarpiece with the Last Judgment, Rogier Van der Weyden, 1445-50, Hospices de Beaune
Beaune Altarpiece with the Last Judgment, Rogier Van der Weyden, 1445-50, Hospices de Beaune
Rogier Van Der Weyden is one of my favorite Northern Renaissance artists and his Beaune Altarpiece with the last judgment is a tour-de-force.
It’s actually fifteen separate paintings on oak panels, some painted on both sides, assembled into a complex folding altarpiece, or polyptych.
Beaune Altarpiece folded, Rogier Van der Weyden
Beaune Altarpiece folded, Rogier Van der Weyden
Tagged art history, Beaune Altarpiece, Bible, Christian, faith, Gospels, Hans Memling, Jesus, Last Judgment, Rogier van der Weyden
Most of the works of Rogier van der Weyden consist of triptychs, diptychs or polyptychs, each including more than one panel.
All works are executed in oil on oak panels unless otherwise mentioned.
Polyptych with the Last Judgement, so called: Beaune Altarpiece, Beaune, Hôtel-Dieu, Beaune, originally oil on oak panels, today some panels are transferred to canvas.
The polyptych consists of 15 different parts.
Opened the polyptych measures 210 × 548 cm.
Rogier van der Weyden: The Complete Works.
Rogier van der Weyden
Last Judgment polyptych, also known as Beaune altarpiece by Rogier van der Weyden (1399-1464) with doors closed
The Last Judgment altarpiece sometimes the Beaune altarpiece) is a large polyptych painted c. 1445–50 by the Early Flemish painter Rogier van der Weyden.
It was executed in oil on oak panel, though parts have been transferred to canvas.
The polyptych is badly damaged through paint loss, wearing and darkening of colours, accumulated dirt and has suffered from poorly choosen restorer's over-paint.
Rogier van der Weyden
Rogier van der Weyden, also known as Rogier de le Pasture (1399/1400 – June 18, 1464) is, with Jan van Eyck, considered one of the greatest exponents of the school of Early Netherlandish painting.
Rogier van der Weyden was born in Tournai as ‘Rogier de le Pasture’ (Roger of the Pasture) in 1399 or 1400.
It was at the occasion of his move to the Dutch-speaking town of Brussels that Rogier began using the Dutch version of his name: ‘Rogier van der Weyden’.
In general the close stylistical link between the documented works of Jacques Daret, and the paintings attributed to Robert Campin and Rogier van der Weyden is considered as the main argument to consider Rogier van der Weyden as a pupil of Robert Campin.
Not a single work that can be attributed with certainty (on the basis of documentary evidence) to Rogier van der Weyden survives.
As can be seen in still extant paintings attributable to him, Rogier van der Weyden was a master in the depiction of emotions and grief.
Most of the works consists of more than one panel; mostly they are triptychs, diptychs or polyptychs.
All works are executed in oil on oak panels except if mentioned otherwise.
Polyptych with the Last Judgement, so called: Beaune Altarpiece, Beaune, Hôtel-Dieu, Beaune, originally oil on oak panels, today some panels are transferred to canvas.
The polyptych consists of 15 different parts.
Opened the polyptych measures 210 x 548 cm.
The Last Judgement, c. 1445-1450.
The Last Judgment (or The Beaune altarpiece) is a very large polyptych altarpiece painted c. 1445-50 by Rogier van der Weyden.
It was executed in oil on oak panel, though parts have been transferred to canvas.
The possible implications on the scientific function of art was a rather unusual subject, so I quickly read over the description, and the mention of Rogier van der Weyden grabbed me.
Two years ago, I have attended a presentation about his Beaune Altarpiece and its commission for the Hôtel-Dieu hospital, and I remembered that I was fascinated by the fiery damnation depicted in the work and the reason for its display for the hospital’s dying patients.
He relayed his studies from his visit to the Innocenti Hospital in Florence, passing through Sienna to Beaune to see Rogier van der Weyden’s panels of the Last Judgement, then to Isenheim and Grünewald’s altarpiece.
The Burgundian chancellor Nicolas Rolin (ca. 1376-1462), one of the richest and most powerful men of the period, commissioned the Beaune Altarpiece for the hospital he had founded to care for the poor as well as the sick in 1443 in Beaune in the old duchy of Burgundy, where the work can still be seen today.
