Bruce Castle

Bruce Castle Park
Bruce Castle Park
Bruce Castle Park is on the site of the one of the four manors of Tottenham, the only mansion in its grounds that remains in the area.
Bruce Castle became a museum in 1906 and continues to house the local history collection.
Previous / Other name: 	Lordship House
Site location: 	Church Lane/Lordship Lane, Tottenham
Listed structures: 	LBI: Bruce Castle House, early C16th circular red brick tower; LBII: sections C17th boundary wall
Events: 	Various, including Tottenham Community Festival, Bruce Castle Carnival.
Bruce Castle has opened for London Open House
The former landscape park of Bruce Castle, in its present form, dates mainly from the C19th and C20th, but preserves some features of the C18th and with buildings of the C16th and C17th.
Bruce Castle Park lies on the northern side of Lordship Lane at its junction with Bruce Grove, to the west is the White Hart Lane Estate (q.v.), to the north is Tottenham Cemetery (q.v.), and residential streets lie on the eastern side.
Bruce Castle is the only mansion in its grounds that still remains in the area, others having disappeared largely due to C20th housing development.
In 1514 the house was rebuilt by Sir William Compton who was granted the manor by Henry VIII, who is known to have visited Bruce Castle in 1516.
In the early part of the C17th Bruce Castle was leased to Sir Thomas Peniston and then in 1625 the manor was purchased by Hugh Hare of a well-to-do Norfolk family.
The family fortunes inevitably suffered during the Civil War although events at Bruce Castle at that time are not known.
Between c.1680 and 1708 it was owned by Henry, 2nd Lord Coleraine, who probably first called it Bruce Castle and made some alterations to the house in 1684, adding his own coat of arms to the north face of the building.
His first wife Constantia was from the wealthy Lucy family and she died young in 1680 somewhat mysteriously; her ghost is reputed to haunt Bruce Castle.
In 1789 the pleasure grounds included such features as fishponds, shrubberies, a kitchen garden, a mount walk and plantations; the park was surrounded by a belt of plantation and an elm avenue along the line of Bruce Grove led to an entrance on Lordship Lane.
Their son was the last lord of the manor to live at Bruce Castle.
From 1815 to 1827 Bruce Castle was owned by a merchant, John Ede, who removed the west wing of the house.
The school at Bruce Castle was visited by people such as Charles Dickens and Charles Babbage, inventor of the early computer, who also sent his sons there.
During the C19th the Bruce Castle estate was reduced to its present size.
Bruce Castle remained a school until 1891 when both house and park were bought by Tottenham UDC.
The house became a museum in 1906 and houses archives and historical artefacts of Haringey's past, plus an exhibition of postal history commemorating Sir Rowland Hill.
The present park is a roughly rectangular enclosure abutted by the Church of All Hallows at its north-western corner, the house is sited on the south-western corner of the park with its entrance from Lordship Lane on the southern side, through a C19th cast-iron gateway with an overthrow with the word 'MUSEUM' in the centre.
Bruce Castle Park has won a Green Flag Award for consecutive years since 2003 .
Beresford 1994; Bruce Castle Archives Haringey; Jean Pegram, From Manor House . . . to Museum, Haringey History Bulletin no.28 (no date).
Conservation Area name: 	Bruce Castle
Bruce Castle Museum
Bruce Castle is a Grade I listed 16th century manor house in 20 acres of parkland.
Sir Rowland Hill's family ran a progressive school for boys at Bruce Castle during the Victorian period.
Bruce Castle opened as a Museum in 1906 and now houses the Borough of Haringey's local history collections and archives.
Hotels near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
Skiddle have found 9 hotels near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 in London.
The distance from the hotel or apartment, to Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 is shown beside each result.
1722 yards/12 min walk from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
1.6 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
1.7 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
1.8 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
1.8 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
1.9 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
1.9 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
2 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
2.5 miles away from Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
If you can't find a hotel near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17, why not check out the main London hotels search?
Distances shown are 'as the crow flies' between the hotel and Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 - driving distances may differ.
Apartments and Hotels near to Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
We've found you a selection of fantastic hotels near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17.
The distance from the hotel to Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 is shown below for each hotel so you can select accommodation within walking distance (or a short journey in a taxi).
The results above include budget hotels, serviced apartments and luxury hotels near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 - so take your pick!
Planning a big weekend near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 ?
Check out our Restaurants near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17 or Events near Bruce Castle Park - Lordship Lane London N17
Bruce Castle Museum
We are most fortunate in Tottenham to have the wonderful facilities of Bruce Castle Museum to help us with both Family History and Local History projects.
Bruce Castle is a grade 1 listed 16th Century manor house in 20 acres of parkland.
Since then, Bruce Castle has been modified several times by owners including the Coleraine family.
An Early illustration of Bruce Castle House 	The 'Round Tower' Bruce Castle Museum and Park
Sir Rowland Hill's family ran a progressive school for boys at Bruce Castle during the Victorian period.
Bruce Castle opened as a Museum in 1906 and now houses the Borough of Haringey's local history collections and archives.
The Friends of Bruce Castle (FoBC)  who are a registered charity established to support Bruce Castle Museum and its services.
Anyone wishing to join the group should contact The membership Secretary, Friends of Bruce Castle, P.O Box 35958, London N17 8WA.
The Curator, Bruce Castle Museum, Lordship Lane, Tottenham, London N17 8NU.
Bruce Castle Park and Tottenham Cemetery
At this point in my walk, I met a very helpful Harringey Council official checking how many litter bins they’d lost and after asking the way I walked under the railway to Bruce Castle Park.
As Sir Rowland Hill once owned the house, the museum also features a history of the Royal Mail.
When Henry VIII ascended to the throne in 1509, he handed the Manor of Wooburn to his friend Sir William Compton, Chief Ranger of Windsor Great Park.
According to the Ambassador, Sir William Compton, a favoured companion of Henry, had been seen courting Anne, Lady Hastings.
Sir William Compton's attraction to Anne Stafford was the genuine article.
In 1514 the dilapidated Bruce Castle and manorial rights were given to Sir William Compton.
There are records that Henry VIII had a meeting with his sister Margaret, Queen of Scotland, at Bruce Castle in 1516.
Sir William Compton arranged that his daughter should marry John St. Leger.
Sir William Compton as Groom of the Stole (the gentleman in charge of the King’s personal toilet and Privy Purse) was a constant thorn in Wolsey’s flesh as head of the mignons.
On of those carried off by the epidemic was Sir William Compton, who held the constableship of Warwick Castle and other important offices in that part of the country.
On the death of Sir William Compton, George Throckmorton of Coughton sought to become sheriff and custos rotulorum of Worcestershire, steward of the see of Worcester and under treasurer of England.
Friends of Bruce Castle The support group for Bruce Castle Museum, Archives and Park
The manor of Tottenham is recorded in the 1086 Domesday Survey, but the name Bruce Castle only became attached when the land came into the ownership of the Scottish House of Bruce.
The oldest parts of the present building date from the 16th century, when it was owned by Sir William Compton, master of Henry VIII's bed-chamber.
It also houses the archives of the London Borough of Haringey.
There is more information about the building and its occupants in Bruce Castle's Wikipedia entry, while Mysterious Britain and Ireland has a short article on the ghosts that are alleged to haunt the building.
Bruce Castle Museum
Lordship Lane
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom by Sinan O.
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom by Deborah H.
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Recommended Reviews for Bruce Castle Museum
Start your review of Bruce Castle Museum.
Located close to Tottenham, the Bruce Castle Museum is an odd sort of place.
Generally I would find it hard to recommend the Bruce Castle Museum to anyone who had not yet exhausted London's larger and grander offerings.
Bruce Castle is a Grade I listed 16th Century manor house in 20 acres of parkland.
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Bruce Castle Museum - London, United Kingdom
Bruce Castle is a fantastic place to be.
Bruce Castle Museum
Bruce Castle Museum
The house at this time was named Lordship House.
Henry Hare, 2nd Baron Coleraine, renamed Lordship House as Bruce Castle, in honour of the ancient connection of the Tottenham estate with the Bruces of Scotland.
By that time the castle was in use as a school, launched by Sir Rowland Hill, an active social and educational reformer, but a man best known for postal reform.
Hill was headmaster of Bruce Castle School, based on the radical - for the time - idea that a teacher's role was no to impart facts and figure for students to memorise, but to foster a desire to learn.
When Hill was appointed to head up the new General Post Office he left Bruce Castle School in the hands of his brother Arthur.
About Bruce Castle Museum
Address: Lordship Lane, Haringey, London, Greater London, England, N17 8NU
Website: Bruce Castle Museum
It is a Grade I listed building.
It is a Grade I listed building.
It is a Grade I listed building
Althorp is a country estate of about 14,000 acres (60 square km) and a Grade I listed stately home in.
Althorp is a country estate of about 14,000 acres (60 square km) and a Grade I listed stately home in.
The house is a Grade I listed building.
The site is a Scheduled Ancient Monument and the Hall is a Grade I listed building.
It is a Grade I listed building.
It is a Grade I listed building.
It is a Grade I listed building.
The castle is protected as a Grade I listed building and Scheduled Monument.
The castle is protected as a Grade I listed building and Scheduled Monument.
The castle is protected as a Grade I listed building and Scheduled Monument.
The site is now in the care of English Heritage and is a Grade I listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument.
Bruce Castle (Lordship House), Lordship Lane, Tottenham, London - www.castlesandmanorhouses.com
Bruce Castle (Lordship House)
Lordship Lane, Tottenham, London, England
Bruce Castle (formerly the Lordship House) is a Grade I listed 16th-century manor house.
It is named after the House of Bruce who formerly owned the land on which it is built.
The current house is one of the oldest surviving English brick houses.
The building also houses the archives of the London Borough of Haringey.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
Dover Castle is a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building.
It is a Grade I listed building and scheduled monument.
It is a Grade I listed building; with a number of features in the grounds and courtyard also listed as Grade I, II and II*
It is a Grade I listed building; with a number of features in the grounds and courtyard also listed as Grade I, II and II*
The house is Grade I listed.
It is a Grade I listed building.
It is one of the finest houses to survive almost unchanged from the Elizabethan era, and has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building, and Scheduled Ancient Monument.
Little Moreton Hall and its sandstone bridge across the moat are recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building, and the ground on which Little Moreton Hall stands is protected as a Scheduled Monument.
Stoneleigh Abbey is a large country mansion and a Grade I listed building.
Tamworth Castle is a Grade I listed building.
Bruce Castle or Lordship House
Bruce Castle is a misnomer, a historical cheat.
It is a manor house in Tottenham in London and was just plain Lordship House for most of its existence.
If you were expecting Bruce Castle to be in Scotland because of Robert the Bruce, then you are right about the tenuous link, but not about the location.
Archaeological excavations done in 2006 by the Museum of London showed that a medieval manor house had stood in the grounds of today’s Bruce Castle Park.
The manor house was named Lordship House well into the 17th century when the name was changed to Bruce Castle by its owner Henry Hare, Baron Coleraine.
He bought Lordship House to enter the select circle of landed gentry.
Renaming it Bruce Castle was part of his social upward movement.
In the 19th century, the house was converted into a school under headmaster Sir Rowland Hill.
Bruce Castle Museum Free
Since 1906, the Grade I listed Bruce Castle has been a museum and now houses the Borough of Haringey's local history collections, archives and art exhibitions.Read More
Bruce Castle Museum in London is a Grade I listed 16th century manor house set in 20 acres of parkland.
Since 1906 Bruce Castle has been a museum and now houses the Borough of Haringey's local history collections, archives and art exhibitions.
This content has been supplied by Bruce Castle Museum
This content has been supplied by Bruce Castle Museum
Bruce Castle Museum
Bruce Castle Museum, Lordship Lane, N17 8NU
Plan your wedding in this Grade I listed building with 18th century rooms and 20 acres of parkland.
How to get to Bruce Castle Museum
Map Bruce Castle Museum and Park; click on the link in the external links section
On leaving the station walk up Bruce Grove (5 mins), the museum is directly ahead, located in Bruce Castle Park.
Or take the number 243 or number 123 bus from stop K on Bruce Grove to stop LE on Lordship Lane (Journey time approximately 2 mins).
Bruce Castle Museum is just across the road, located in Bruce Castle Park.
Take care as you cross Lordship Lane, and then enter Bruce Castle Park, just along to your right.
This road is Lordship Lane and Bruce Castle Museum is approximately 25mins walk.
Buses 243,123 and 318 all stop near Bruce Castle Museum.
Lordship Lane
Bruce Castle 1686–1815
With the exception of its neighbour, All Hallows’ church, Bruce Castle is Tottenham’s oldest surviving building, and its second most famous after White Hart Lane Stadium.
The present house dates from the early sixteenth century; it was acquired by Sir William Compton in 1514, and comprehensively rebuilt; in 1516 Henry VIII met his sister Margaret of Scotland here, and Elizabeth I stayed here in 1578, as a guest of Sir William’s grandson Henry.
Bruce Castle has never had any military function.
This drawing (dated 1686) represents Bruce Castle as it was in the late seventeenth century, a typical large manor house in the Tudor/Jacobean style.
At some time in the eighteenth century, Bruce Castle was extensively remodelled to bring it into line with the Classical tastes of Georgian England.
Bruce Castle from the south-east, drawn in the 1790s—as far as I can judge, from what is now Broadwater Road.
Bruce Castle - a brief history
Bruce Castle is a 16th century manor house in Tottenham.
Originally known as ‘Lordship House’, there has been such a building on or near this site since the early medieval period, although we do not know what it looked like.
Bruce Castle by Wolridge - 1686
Bruce Castle Museum and Haringey Archive - today
At the end of the 1500s Bruce Castle was used as a refuge from the Plague.
It is said that Lady Constantia has become the ghost of Bruce Castle and can be seen at the window at night in November.
Henry was a keen historian and it is believed that he gave the building the name ‘Bruce Castle’.
The next owner of the house was Henry’s grandson (another Henry) who added more rooms and the coat of arms, which remains on the North face of Bruce Castle.
These changes cost a huge amount of money and eventually Bruce Castle was auctioned off.
After Wilmot’s death Bruce Castle was purchased by John Ede and then in 1827 by the Hill Family.
Sir Rowland HillThe Hill family opened a private boarding school for boys.
It was a very popular school and boys came from around the world to Bruce Castle School.
Joshua Pedley who bought Bruce Castle then sold it on to Tottenham Urban District Council.
There has also been a dentist at Bruce Castle.
Bruce Castle is now a Grade 1 listed building and houses the London Borough of Haringey’s archive and local history museum.
Picture above shows Sir Rowland Hill
