Bodiam Castle

castles to be built in England, they provided security and also separate suites of rooms for the Lord, his domestic staff, guests and garrison.
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge was something of a character in his day, he belonged to an old established
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge was a Knight for the Shire of Sussex for 10 Parliments between 1379 and 1388 and was without doubt one of the most powerful men in Sussex at this time, along with his Patron the Earl of
England at the end of the 14th century was seriously under threat of invasion from the French; the victories of Crecy and Poitiers were a distant memory as the French slowly clawed back her possessions.
The castle was to remain in the Dalyngrigge family until 1483 when it came to another famous Sussex family, The Lewknors by marriage.
Sir Thomas Lewknor was a Lancastrian and was attainted by Richard III.
Nearest Railway station is Robertsbridge  ( 5miles ).
The Castle in Medieval England & Wales - Colin Platt.
Bodiam Castle, East Sussex, England taken at dawn in the fog back in November.
This walk reveals the beautiful rolling countryside of rural East Sussex and throws you the keys to the magnificent moated ruins of Bodiam Castle, a showpiece fortress built in 1385 by the knight Sir Edward Dalyngrigge.
We meet at London Charing Cross station and take the train to Robertsbridge, a sleepy village near the Sussex/Kent county border.
Nowadays, Robertsbridge is known for its world-famous cricket bat factory and a small but thriving Hutterite (Anabaptist) community, founded in 1971 on the site of a former tuberculosis sanatorium.
Departing Robertsbridge, we strike out to the east down the valley of the River Rother.
Our route back to Robertsbridge takes us over a Roman Road and through apple orchards to the village of Salehurst, which is reputed to take its name from the many willow trees found here.
The last leg of the walk follows country lanes back to Robertsbridge.
You focus on Bodiam Castle, which is one of England’s most iconic medieval buildings.
An influential figure in Parliament, Sir Edward persuaded King Richard II in 1385 to grant him permission to crenellate.
Keen to tell intriguing and sometimes grizzly tales of medieval life, they provide a fascinating glimpse into the 14th-century mindset.
Drawing on historically real and imagined characters, A Knight’s Peril offers a glimpse into medieval life with all its sounds and social scheming, set inside real 14th-century walls.
History of Bodiam Castle (KATE) This fabulous castle was built by the prestigious Sir Edward Dalyngrigge of East Sussex between the years of 1385 and 1388.
Location (KATE) Bodiam Castle is situated in East Sussex, South East of England.
Conclusion (LARISSA) So this fabulous castle in East Sussex is up for sale, price will be the highest bidder!
It was of a quadrangular plan and surrounded by a broad moat.
It was of a quadrangular plan and surrounded by a broad moat.
This was Richard III's favorite residence.
Built on and improved upon, and is now one of England's largest castle.
1386 The French Invasion of England
In 1386 the French made preparations to invade England.
The council of King Richard II prepared for the invasion by raising an army of ten thousand men at arms and thousands of archers.
Sir Edward Dallingridge, was the commissioner of array for Sussex and in respect of his servce to the King and due to the threat of French invasion, Richard granted Sir  Edward a license to crenelate his manor house.
The French invasion fleet set out, but bad weather dispersed the fleet.
A majestic 14th Century moated castle, with ruined interior and splendid grounds.
Robertsbridge
Robertsbridge is in East Sussex.
Robertsbridge is a village (pop.
roughly 2,500) in the county of East Sussex, England.
Robertsbridge hosts a few unique features; The "Bruderhof", a faith community living in a self sufficient commune at the edge of the village.
The famous cricket brand Gray Nicolls (the Nicolls part) was founded in Robertsbridge, and operates from its original location on station road to this day, making (among other things) handmade cricket bats.
Also the Kent and East Sussex railway finds its most westerly extension at Robertsbridge station.
This Steam locomotive company operates between Tenterden and Bodiam, and the line is awaiting connection to the existent line at Robertsbridge, over the A21 main road.
A small collection of Steam trains and carriages are kept at Robertsbridge station and operated occasionally on the short track up to the the A21.
It takes roughly an hour and a half to get into central London by car from Robertsbridge, traffic permitting.
Robertsbridge train station is frequented by twice hourly services in both directions.
Robertsbridge is a great place for country walks, offering many public footpaths and bridleways in the immediate surrounding countryside.
Battle abbey in Battle, a nearby small historic town, famed for the location of the The 1066 battle of Hastings, whereby William the Conqueror took control of England and changed the course of history forever.
Robertsbridge Cistercian abbey, unfortunately little remains of this historic site, though some ruins are still visible and can be easily reached on a walk or short drive from the village on the other (eastern) side of the A21 road.
Apart from its 3 pubs offering hearty traditional meals, Robertsbridge also has a good Indian Restaurant: New Spice 13 High St, Robertsbridge, TN32 5AE
Seven Stars Inn, High Street, Robertsbridge, East Sussex, TN32 5AJ, ☎ 01580 880333, .
Over 600yrs old and reputedly among the most haunted pubs in England.
The George Inn, High Street Robertsbridge East Sussex TN32 5AW, ☎ 01580 880315, .
The Ostrich Hotel, The Ostrich Hotel Station Road, Robertsbridge East Sussex TN32 5DG, ☎ 01580 881737, .
Glenferness B&B, Brightling Road, Robertsbridge, East Sussex, TN32 5DP, ☎ 01580 881 841, [10].
Archetypal 14th century moated castle with ruined interior - a glimpse of medieval splendour
With its majestic towers and wide moat, our 14th-century castle is a perfect setting for a memorable wedding day.
Castle-Manor House of the Week - Bodiam Castle, East Sussex
Bodiam, near Robertsbridge, East Sussex, England, UK
Bodiam Castle was built in 1385 along the River Rother in East Sussex as a fortress to defend the southern coast of England, which is now some miles away.
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge, a former knight of Edward III who had made his own fortunes fighting as a member of the Free Companies in France from 1367 to 1377, married into the land-owning family of Wardeuxs who held the manor of Bodiam and obtained a license to crenellate (build a castle) from Richard II to build the stronghold as a bastion against potential French invasion during the Hundred Years’ War.
Instead of refortifying his existing manor house, as the license from Richard II premitted, Dalyngrigge decided instead to build his castle from sandstone on a new spot.
It became the Dalyngrigge family’s home, and the center of the manor of Bodiam.
Sir Thomas Lewknor supported the House of Lancaster during the War of the Roses, so in 1483 when Richard III of the House of York was made king, Lewknor was out of favor.
