Angkor Wat

Bildunterschrift:Angkor Wat was first a Hindu, then subsequently a Buddhist, temple complex in Cambodia and the largest religious monument in the world.
The temple was built by the Khmer King Suryavarman II in the early 12th century.
As the best-preserved temple at the site, it is the only one to have remained a significant religious center since its foundation.
It is in an area of Cambodia where there is an important group of ancient structures.
Founded early in the ninth century around the Great Lake on the north Cambodian plain, it ruled an area that by the end of the tenth century comprised most of modern Cambodia, southern Laos, and northeastern and central Thailand; in the twelfth century, it created one of the wonders of the world, the gigantic temple complex of Angkor Wat.
The new capital, Yaśodharapura, was built around an elevation called the Bakheng, on which the state temple was constructed.
While it was originally believed that the Khmer moved their capital from Hariharālaya, located near the small Roluos River, to take advantage of the larger Siem Reap River at Yaśodharapura, this has been recently disproved.
Excavations carried out by Pottier have demonstrated that the Siem Reap River is not a natural river but a diversion from the Puok River at a point around ten kilometres north of the capital district; further work by the hydrologist Terry Lustig of the Greater Angkor Project of the University of Sydney has shown that the diversionary works were built at the end of the ninth century, at the same time the capital moved from Hariharālaya to Yaśodharapura.
To the contrary, the capital was moved from a riverside location to one of the few places on the north Cambodian plain that had no river, and a river was then brought to it.
The present chapter proposes and tests the hypothesis that the decisive factor in the relocation of the Angkorian capital was the high water-table surrounding Yaśodharapura.
Specifically, it is posited that the new capital was relocated to that part of the north Cambodian plain where the ground-water resources were the most plentiful, and that these water resources underlie the prosperity and greatness of Angkor.
The high water-table beneath the north Cambodian plain is caused by the combination of the plain’s geology and climate.
Contemporary Cambodian farmers make good use of the high water-table to supplement rainfall for their rice crops during the rainy season and to water their domestic animals during the dry season.
Small tanks—artificial ponds dug into the water-table—are found next to almost every house in rural Cambodia (Garami and Kertai 1993), and farm villages are sited next to somewhat larger tanks (van Liere 1982).
Chinese travellers of the fifth century noted the presence of village tanks (Pelliot 1903), and Cambodian rural settlements of the eighth century were similarly located around natural and artificial ponds (Vickery 1986).
According to Stargardt (1983), who studied the ancient agronomy of Satingpra, an area on the Tenasserim peninsula with a water-table similar to that of Cambodia, the average village tank contained 6,000 cubic metres of water during the wet season and 3,000 cubic metres during the dry season.
Prior research on Cambodia’s ground-water resources
Some early research on ground-water resources in Cambodia has demonstrated a correlation between high water-tables and the locations of Khmer settlements dating from the earliest times.
In 1961, Rasmussen collected data on the level of the water-table in much of Cambodia, based on measurements of the water levels in tube wells, ordinary wells about a metre in diameter, bored into the earth and usually lined with concrete.
First, nearly all of central Cambodia has a high water-table, with water almost always within five or six metres of the surface.
Second, four Cambodian provinces, Kompong Thom, Siem Reap, Svey Rieng, and Takeo, have even higher water-tables, with water found one, two or three metres below ground.
Takeo is the home of Angkor Borei, the earliest seat of Khmer civilisation, Kompong Thom is the home of Sambor Prei Kuk, the capital of the Khmer kingdom in the seventh century, and Siem Reap is the home of the successive Khmer capitals between 802 and 1431, Hariharālaya, Yaśodharapura, and Angkor.
Table 3.1 shows the measured water-table levels within a seven-kilometre radius of the Bakong temple at the centre of Hariharālaya; Table 3.2 shows the measured water-table levels within a 15-kilometre radius of the Bakheng temple-mountain at the centre of Yaśodharapura; Table 3.3 shows the measured water-table levels in the eastern part of Siem Reap province, east of the Roluos River; and Table 3.4 shows the measured water-table levels in the western part of Siem Reap province and more than 15 kilometres west of the Bakheng.
A comparison between the groundwater resources around Hariharālaya, the first capital, and those around the new capital at Yaśodharapura shows that:
By way of contrast, the new capital of Yaśodharapura was situated in the centre of an almost perfect circle, approximately 30 kilometres in diameter,5 within which ground-water resources are close to the surface.
There is less variation in water-table levels around Yaśodharapura than around Hariharālaya.
By way of contrast, almost all the data points around Yaśodharapura were high or very high, and the high and very high points were practically equal in number.
In short, the average variance from the mean water-table depth was twice as great around Hariharālaya as around Yaśodharapura.
The region of high and very high water-tables around Yaśodharapura was much larger than the corresponding region around Hariharālaya.
The area of the 30-kilometre circle of high and very high subsurface water around Yaśodharapura measures approximately 700 square kilometres, over four times larger than the significantly lower region within seven kilometres of Hariharālaya, and around thirty times larger than the slightly lower water-table in the region immediately around Hariharālaya.
Moreover, a comparison between the area around Yaśodharapura and the far eastern and far western parts of Siem Reap province, where no capital was ever sited, shows much starker contrasts in water-table levels:
The eastern part of the province has a much lower water-table than the regions around either Yaśodharapura or Hariharālaya.
Specifically, while only 5.2% of the data points around Yaśodharapura, and 22.3% of the data points around Hariharālaya, reflected a mid-level or low water-table, 49.6% of the data points east of the Roluos River were mid- or low-level.
In all, 50% (56 of 112) of the data points in the area between the 30-kilometre circle around Yaśodharapura and the western boundary of the province show a mid-level or low water-table.
The new capital district at Yaśodharapura was in a large region of very high subsurface water, far surpassing the location of Hariharālaya in size, consistency, and, most importantly, proximity to subsurface water.
More striking still, Yaśodharapura was in virtually the centre of that region.
Observation of contemporary farming practices indicates that high water-tables make three distinct contributions to Cambodian agronomy.
First, high water-tables make rice culture more productive, especially in a region of poor, sandy soils such as central Cambodia.
Infiltration is particularly severe in Cambodia, with its highly permeable sandy soils.
In short, relocating the capital from Hariharālaya to Yaśodharapura at the end of the ninth century moved the Khmer centre of settlement from a smaller, less agriculturally productive area to a larger, more productive one.
The movement of the capital from Hariharālaya to Yaśodharapura required not only the construction of an entirely new city but also the diversion of a river, and creation of the gigantic, 15-square kilometre East Baray, all at roughly the same time.
The relocation from Hariharālaya to Yaśodharapura was a move from a smaller, less productive and, therefore, less populated region to a larger, more productive and more thickly settled region—to a region, in other words, where the large labour force needed for the urban works of Yaśodharapura and, later, of Angkor was readily available.
This was the Khmer response to the problems posed by the nutrient-poor, permeable sandy soil characteristic of the Cambodian plain.
The present research demonstrates that the Khmer, on the broad but relatively infertile Cambodian plain, developed their own characteristic form of agriculture, one that could take advantage of the strengths and counteract the weaknesses of their environment.
Hamid Ansari visits Angkor Wat temple in Cambodia
The Vice President visited the world’s largest Hindu temple complex, days after India allayed Cambodian concerns over reports of building of the temple replica in Bihar.
Vice President Hamid Ansari on Thursday visited Angkor Wat, the world’s largest Hindu temple complex, days after India allayed Cambodian concerns over reports of building of a replica of the world heritage site in Bihar.
Mr. Ansari, who is in Cambodia for a three-day trip, travelled to Siem Reap province from the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh to visit Angkor Wat, Ta Prohm temples and the Mekong-Ganga Textile museum.
Cambodia had this year lodged a protest with India in June over a private trust’s plans to build an Angkor Wat replica in Bihar, saying it “seriously violates” the 12th century Hindu temple and a world heritage property which holds exceptional and universal value.
The protest came after Cambodia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation received a report about Patna-based Mahavir Mandir Trust’s plans to construct a replica of the largest Hindu temple complex in the world.
Ahead of Mr. Ansari’s visit, India had allayed Cambodian concerns over the temple being built in Bihar.
“Angkor Wat Temple is the heart of Cambodia, and the Indian government stated that this construction won’t break the good relationship between both countries, and they promise to stop the company which plans to build it,” Foreign Ministry spokesman Chum Sounry was quoted as saying by the Cambodian media last week after Indian Ambassador to Cambodia Naveen Srivastava’s meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Hor Namhong.
India's assurance to Cambodia
“The Ambassador told the Deputy Prime Minister that the government of India advised the private company to change the style and structure (in the blueprint) in order to avoid copying from Cambodia’s Angkor Wat temple,” the spokesman was quoted as saying.
Asked about Cambodia’s protest over building of an Angkor Wat replica, Secretary East Anil Wadhwa had said ahead of the Vice President’s visit that India has allayed Cambodian concerns in this regard by arranging for a visit by a representative of the Cambodian Embassy here to the temple and asked them to suggest changes that would satisfy them.
Talking about India’s restoration projects at the cultural sites in Cambodia, the Vice President had on Wednesday said, “The temples at Angkor are a reflection of our shared cultural heritage.
We are very proud of our association in the restoration of historical heritage of Angkor Wat temple complex as well as other sites.
Lost City Of The Khmer Empire
Did you know that Angkor Wat in Cambodia is one of the largest and oldest temple complexes in the world?
The Khmer Empire
The Khmer empire controlled the Cambodian region and surrounding areas of Thailand, Laos, Vietnam and Myanmar between the 9th and the 15th centuries from their capital in Angkor.
Most of our knowledge comes from the Hindu-Buddhist temples of Angkor Wat and Angkor Thom.
However, the dense tropical forests combined with the threat of land mines (from the Cambodian civil war) prevented them from exploring the area.
The Khmer Empire, which depended largely on agriculture, had figured out how to harness the monsoon rains.
Angkor Wat/Cambodia
For many, Angkor Wat is synonym with Angkor; though, Angkor was a whole city and even more an empire and as such much, much bigger than Angkor Wat, what merely means 'city temple', 'state temple' or 'temple of Angkor'.
One of them is the Bayon, another and significant different state temple which is situated in Angkor Thom.
It's the biggest religious monument in the world, the most visited sight in Southeast Asia, the best-preserved in the whole Angkor Archaeological Park, the most impressive monument for most of the visitors, the only religious site of whole Angkor which remained a significant religious center since it's foundation until today, it represents the top of the high classical style of Khmer architecture, it's the symbol for Cambodia since 1863 and decorates the national flag of Cambodia, and maybe there is more to add...
The temple complex of Angkor Wat, seen from the northern pool west of the temple.
The great state temple Angkor Wat was supposedly built in the early 12th century in the reign of king Suryavarman II (1113 - 1145/50 CE) as his mausoleum in the Khmer capital of the time, Yasodharapura.
The precondition for the construction of Angkor Wat and the many, many other great temple complexes of Angkor was laid in the time around 900 CE.
When Suryavarman II decided the erection of Angkor Wat, he let it placed into the southeastern corner of Angkors capital of the time, Yasodharapura.
On the contrary, it was from then on under pressure from both sites, the west, where the Siamese set further pressure on it and from the east, where a new conquering people, the Annamese (Vietnamese) approached closer to Cambodia's borders and began to eat it up.
Over all the centuries, after the Khmer capital was shifted, the magnificent temple remained an active religious center.
Originally a Hindu temple, Angkor Wat changed to an important center of worship for theravada buddhists.
Angkor Wat attracted wider attention after the French naturalist Henri Mouhot visited and explored the site in 1860 and published his observations in a travel narrative 'Travels in Siam, Cambodia, Laos, and Annam'.
When France established a 'protectorate' over the remaining, almost extinct Cambodia of 1863, it expanded in the following decades (1907) to the Angkor region around Siem Reap, what was then part of Siam.
Interestingly there was a great difference between Angkor Wat and other grand religious monuments of world's history as the great cathedrals in Europe, the mosques in the Islamic world or other Hindu or Buddhist temples of the past or the present as magnificient Borobodur in Java.
Angkor Wat was dedicated to Vishnu, one of the central Hindu gods.
But Angkor Wat's Vishnu is another Vishnu than the one celebrated in other Hindu temples.
Angkor Wat's Vishnu is Suryavarman II, the godking himself, who was seen as a reincarnation of the old god.
The numerous statues of Vishnu and Shiva in Angkor Wat show the traits of Suryavarman II.
The basic idea of Angkor Wat is similar to many other Hindu temples.
It was interrupted in the time of the Cambodian civil war and the time of Democratic Kampuchea.
Cambodias biggest oil trust Sokimex is managing the site and holds the rights to cash the visitors since 1990.
Many of the (Cambodian) workers in these restoration teams don't get paid.
The Cambodian government itself does little for Angkor's preservation.
ince the UN intervention in Cambodia in 1993 the number of visitors of Angkor is increasing every year.
Siem Reap, the nearby Cambodian town and base for a visit to Angkor, has grown like cancer in the last twenty years.
Khmer Empire
The Khmer empire was the largest continuous empire of South East Asia, based in what is now Cambodia.
During its formation, the Khmer Empire had intensive cultural, political, and trade relations with Java, and later with the Srivijaya empire that lay beyond the Khmer state's southern border.
No written historical documentation of the Khmer Empire remains; knowledge of the Khmer civilization is derived primarily from stone inscriptions in many languages including Sanskrit, Pali, Birman, Japanese, and even Arabic, at archaeological sites and from the reports of Chinese diplomats and traders.
Jayavarman II - the founder of Khmer Empire
In 802, he returned to Cambodia, declared himself the "universal monarch" (chakravartin), God-King (devaraja) Jayavarman II, and declared the independence of Kambujadesa (Cambodia) from Java.
Records of this declaration have given rise to speculation that Cambodia, a group of politically independent principalities collectively known to the Chinese as Chenla, might have been the dependent vassal of Java for some years before the reign of Jayavarman II.
Yasodharapura - the First City of Khmer Empire
He also built numerous other Hindu temples and ashramas, or retreats for ascetics.
He resumed the extensive building schemes of the earlier kings and established a series of temples in the Angkor area, including Pre Rup and the East Mebon, on an island in the middle of the East Baray (dedicated on the January 28, 953), and several Buddhist temples and monasteries.
Between 900 and 1200 C.E., the Khmer Empire produced some of the world's most magnificent architectural masterpieces in Angkor.
In 2007 an international team of researchers using satellite photographs and other modern techniques concluded that the medieval settlement around the temple complex Angkor had been the largest preindustrial city in the world with an urban sprawl of 1,150 square miles.
Suryavarman II
For a few decades, under Suryavarman II (reigned 1113 - after 1145) the kingdom was united internally and able to expand.
Suryavarman II conquered the Mon kingdom of Haripunjaya to the west (in today's central Thailand), and the area further west to the border with the kingdom of Bagan (modern Burma); in the south he took further parts of the Malay peninsula down to the kingdom of Grahi (corresponding roughly to the modern Thai province of Nakhon Si Thammarat; in the east, several provinces of Champa; and the countries in the north as far as the southern border of modern Laos.
The last inscription, which mentions Suryavarman II's name in connection with a planned invasion of Vietnam, is dated Wednesday, October 17, 1145.
Another period of disturbances, in which kings reigned briefly and were violently overthrown by rebellions or wars, followed the death of Suryavarman II.
During Jayavarman's reign, Hindu temples were altered to display images of the Buddha, and Angkor Wat briefly became a Buddhist shrine.
During Jayavarman VII's reign, Hindu temples were altered to display images of the Buddha, and Angkor Wat briefly became a Buddhist shrine.
During the thirteenth century most of the statues of Buddha statues in the empire (archaeologists estimate the number at over 10,000, of which few traces remain) were destroyed, and Buddhist temples were converted to Hindu temples.
The Buddhist temples impressed Zhou with their simplicity; he noted that the images of Buddha were made of gilded plaster.
1113-1150: Suryavarman II (not known)
Cambodia 1962: Angkor Wat temple complex
Alas, there were no titles in this silent film about this famous Khmer Buddhist temple complex, but Tom Voute who had been there gave me the following details:
Angkor Wat Temple, Angkor, Cambodia
Angkor Wat is a spectacular temple in central Cambodia, built by the vanished Khmer empire.
It was constructed during the reign of king Suryavarman II, who ruled from 1113 to at least 1145.
In those days, it was customary for the Khmer Empire to maintain a state temple at the heart of the city.
However, when Suryavarman assumed power, the existing Baphuon state temple was dedicated to Shiva.
This new state temple came to be called Angkor Wat, meaning "The city that is a temple."
The largest religious structure ever built is Angkor Wat (City Temple), enclosing 162.6 ha (401 acres) in Cambodia.
It was built to the Hindu god Vishnu by the Khmer King Suryavarman II in the period 1113–50.
As the sun rises over the Cambodian jungle and the first rays of sunlight strike the ancient stone, a 20th-century dispute over this 12th-century wonder becomes clear.
Other Cambodian workers empty trowels of cement into cracks, large and small, in the ancient sandstone.
But its work has been hampered by shortage of money and by bickering among outside experts over who should do the work and who should serve on an international advisory panel that is being formed to counsel the Cambodian Government on the restoration.
While the Angkor temples are indisputably worthy of inclusion on the list, they cannot be added unless the Cambodian Government offers up a formal, highly detailed plan for maintaining and policing Angkor.
Nevertheless, Unesco's local representative in Cambodia, Richard A. Engelhardt, an American archeologist, is patiently working with Cambodian Government officials in hopes of submitting the plan later this year.
Pich Keo, the director of Cambodia's national museum, is one of the few Cambodian experts on Angkor -- the ancient capital of the Khmer empire and home to Angkor Wat -- to have survived the Khmer Rouge terror of the 1970's.
Cambodia is only now emerging from the shadow of the nightmare years of the Pol Pot regime and of the more than 12 years of civil war that followed its ouster.
"Angkor Wat is a symbol of Cambodia's greatness," Pich Keo explains.
It was the dream of a megalomaniacal king, Suryavarman II, who enslaved tens of thousands of his subjects in order to build at Angkor Wat an earthly replica of the Hindu cosmos.
Before the French were forced to leave Cambodia in the early 1970's because of the fighting, generations of French scholars had lived at Angkor, working to conserve the temples of the great Khmer kings.
At the time of Suryavarman, the state religion of the Khmer empire was Hinduism, a legacy of the peaceful Indian traders who centuries before had traveled to Cambodia in search of spices and gems.
In 1978, Vietnam had invaded Cambodia, ending the genocidal rule of the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge.
Taking their cue from the United States, virtually all the non-Communist countries in the world shunned Cambodia as a Vietnamese puppet state.
In April 1986, India and Cambodia reached agreement on the restoration, with India providing the technical expertise -- archeologists, architects, engineers, masons and chemists, in teams of about 15 that rotate annually.
The Cambodians provide the laborers and many of the materials.
Dozens of young Cambodian women sit precariously on metal scaffolding set against a massive, 40-foot stone stairway leading to the pyramidical sanctuary of Angkor Wat.
Few of the Cambodian laborers pay attention to their work, and they seem neither to notice nor to care when fingernail-size chunks of the carved sandstone give way and tumble down the stone mountain.
THE RUMORS ABOUT THE Indians' restoration work began to spread almost as soon as the first Indian team arrived in Cambodia in 1986.
Ishizawa returned from Cambodia with a report in which he described elements of the Indian work as "unsuitable" and even "primitive," and urged Unesco to step in.
The Cambodian laborers criticize the work as well.
"It was very disturbing," he says, recalling how the Cambodians stood in pools of the chemical solvents.
The relationship between the Indians and the Cambodian laborers is poor, in part a reflection of the difficult working conditions that both face at Angkor Wat.
While in Cambodia, the Indians have almost no contact with their families in India.
"The chemicals make your hands feel hot and they turn red," says a 17-year-old Cambodian.
The Indians working at Angkor Wat do not speak Khmer and none of the Cambodian workers speak more than a few words of English or Hindi, so there is little communication apart from hand signals.
Furthermore, no effort is being made to train the Cambodians to take over detailed restoration work after the Indians leave, even though some sort of training program is badly needed -- during the anti-intellectual purges of the Khmer Rouge, most of Cambodia's archeologists and art historians were killed or driven from the country.
In Phally, a lanky, 31-year-old Cambodian working with the Indian team as an English-Khmer translator, recalls how one morning in 1977 his father -- who had worked at Angkor conservation for 20 years -- was taken into custody by Khmer Rouge soldiers and placed in chains and dragged away.
WHILE FIGHTING RAGES on in areas of central Cambodia, the civil war is formally over, ended on paper by a peace settlement brokered last fall by the United Nations.
They have been invited by the Cambodians to complete work on the Baphuon, an 11th-century temple that French conservators were restoring when they fled in the early 1970's.
The board will report to Cambodia's newly restored head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who, before he was forced into exile in 1970, was a regular visitor to Angkor.
Even as the United Nations prepares to spend more than $2 billion on the peacekeeping operation, Engelhardt's job is to raise a few million dollars to begin surveying the monuments at Angkor and, he hopes, to begin educational programs that one day might allow Cambodians to take over the preservation work themselves.
Each month, two or three major pieces of statuary disappear from Angkor Wat and the other temples, often stolen with the help of Cambodian guards bribed with the equivalent of $5 or $10.
Although the Cambodian Government has no reliable figures on tourism, the daily flights between Phnom Penh and Siem Reap, the Cambodian city nearest to Angkor, are usually jammed with foreign sightseers, and there is talk of charter flights from Bangkok to Siem Reap within a year.
Photos: On the third level of Angkor Wat's northern side, a member of the Indian restoration team supervises Cambodian laborers as they attack the vegetation.
What can be said about the largest religious monument in the world?
It was built in the early 12th century and it's incredible to think that they did it without all the heavy moving equipment we have today.
But Angkor, located in Cambodia’s north-western province Siem Reap, is much more than this most famous single temple.
The Archaeological Park, stretching over 400 square kilometres of forested land, includes magnificent temple complexes of different succeeding capitals of the Khmer Empire from the 10th to 13th century.
In chronological order the state temples were Bakheng, called “the first Angkor” from about 900, the steeper step pyramids Pre Rup and Ta Keo from the 10th century, the smaller Phimeanakas and the huger Baphuon from the 11th century and the most famous buildings, Angkor Wat and  facetower-temple Bayon in Angkor Thom from the middle an end of the 12th century.
#travel #Cambodia
It is the heart and soul of Cambodia.
Ancient city, Cambodia
Alternative titles: Angkor Thom; Yaśodharapura
Angkor, archaeological site in what is now northwestern Cambodia, lying 4 miles (6 km) north of the modern town of Siĕmréab.
It was the capital of the Khmer (Cambodian) empire from the 9th to the 15th century, a period that is considered the classical era of Cambodian history.
Its most-imposing monuments are Angkor Wat, a temple complex built in the 12th century by King Suryavarman II (reigned 1113–c. 1150), and Angkor Thom, a temple complex built about 1200 by King Jayavarman VII.
In the later history of the city, the central temples were completely architectural creations (i.e., pyramid temples), such as the Phimeanakas of Suryavarman I (reigned c. 1000–50); the Baphuon of Udayadityavarman II (reigned 1050–66); and the Buddhist temple of Bayon, which was the central temple built by Jayavarman VII when he gave the city, which was later known as Angkor Thom, or “Great City,” its more or less final form.
For example, Angkor Wat, which is perhaps the greatest and certainly the most famous of all the temples in the Angkor complex, was built by King Suryavarman II in the 12th century as a vast funerary temple within which his remains were to be deposited, thus symbolically confirming his permanent identity with Vishnu.
Even during this period, however, a number of early European visitors to Cambodia showed a strong curiosity concerning the “lost city,” and, when the French colonial regime was established (1863), the entire site became the focus of intense scholarly interest and concern.
During the political and military upheavals of the second half of the 20th century in Cambodia, there was some war damage and thievery among the temples at Angkor, but the major problem was one of neglect.
Is Angkor Wat the largest religious monument in the world?
the Khmer King Suryavarman II
Many believe Angkor Wat was supposed to be King Suryavarman II's funerary temple because _________.
It was founded as a Hindu temple for all of the Khmer empire
Angkor Wat was originally built as King Suryavarman II's ______ and ______.
Angkor Wat is responsible for ______ % of tourism in the country of Cambodia.
Vishnu at Angkor Wat, Cambodia
Angkor Wat was dedicated to Vishnu who is the supreme God in the Vaishnavite tradition of Hinduism and venerated as one of the five primary forms of God .
When Angkor Wat became a Buddhist temple, the head of Vishnu was replaced with the head of Buddha.
