Buildings of Nuffield College, Oxford

Nuffield College
A few weeks ago I had the chance to see Nuffield College, just across from the castle mound.
Nuffield is a relatively new college, founded in 1937 after a donation to the University by the William Morris otherwise know as Lord Nuffield, the industrialist and the founder of Morris Motors.
He donated land for the college on New Road, to the west of the city center near the mound of Oxford Castle.
In addition to the land Nuffield gave £900,000 to build the college and to provide it with an endowment fund.
For the creation of Nuffield College and for his other donations (many of the medical buildings and programs) he was described in 1949 by an editorial in The Times as "the greatest benefactor of the University since the Middle Ages".
It was the first tower built in Oxford for 200 years and is about 150 feet tall.
Since its beginnings, Nuffield College has initiated a number of trends at both Oxford and Cambridge.
I love the generosity of Lord Nuffield, who in his day was one of the wealthiest men in Europe and who gave away his fortune to so many great causes (He and his wife had no children).
Looking down at Nuffield College from the Castle Mound
The windows in the Chapel were designed by John Piper and they are truly stunning!
According to legend Oxford university was founded in 872 when Alfred the Great happened to meet some monks there and had a scholarly debate that lasted several days.
In reality it grew up in the 12th century when famous teachers began to lecture there and groups of students came to live and study in Oxford.
Many of them came to Oxford.
However the traders in Oxford soon missed the custom of the students and persuaded some of them to return in 1214.
In 1377 John Wycliffe was expelled from Oxford University after he criticized some of the church's teachings.
In 1542 the chapel of Christchurch College became Oxford Cathedral.
In 1444 Duke Humfrey (younger brother of Henry V) founded a library at Oxford.
In 1621 a physic garden, where medicinal plants were grown, was created at Oxford.
In 1647 after the civil war Oxford University was purged of royalists among its staff.
Oxford University press dates from 1478.
The University Act of 1854 made it possible for those who did not belong to the Church of England to study at Oxford.
In 1889 a dissenter's academy moved to Oxford.
Nuffield College was founded in 1937.
The Oxford Centre for Management Studies was founded in 1965.
The Zoology and Psychology buildings at Oxford were erected in 1970.
After 1974 more and more of the colleges at Oxford changed from being single sex to being dual sex colleges.
Nuffield College
Nuffield College, which was founded in 1937, is located in the centre of Oxford.
The College was the first Oxford College to have (i) a subject specialisation, (ii) to admit both men and women as students and academics, (iii) to be graduate only.
The College buildings were designed by Austen Harrison.
The College was originally funded by William Morris (Lord Nuffield) a local businessman who founded Morris Motors Ltd.
In the late 1950s additional resources to complete the buildings were provide by the Nuffield Foundation, a seperate charity also setup by Lord Nuffield.
How 20th century crept up on Oxford
It was not until the 1950s that Oxford University allowed modern architecture, writes CHRIS KOENIG
The idea that Oxford somehow stumbles along a few decades behind everywhere else is most evident in its architecture.
Read in Nikolaus Pevsner's Buildings of Oxfordshire, for instance, that the first truly 20th century buildings in the city appeared more than half way through it and you find yourself thinking about dons in much the same way as the Mock Turtle in Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland thought about his school master: "We called him Tortoise because he taught us.
He wrote of two small buildings, both by Michael Powers of the Architects Co-Partnership, dated 1957 and 1958: "These, one can hardly believe it, were the first buildings at Oxford in the language of the 20th century.
In 1960, Arne Jacobsen arrived in town from Copenhagen and started building St Catherine's College, the same time that the traditional-style Nuffield College was completed.
Pevsner wrote: "This, a whole college built by one man to one design, makes Nuffield College look even more absurd.
He added that the International Modern of the 1930s never appeared at Oxford at all (until St Cat's).
The reasons why Oxford University suddenly embraced the architectural modern world are enigmatic: a sort of latter-day enlightenment perhaps, waking it up out of its cloistered introspection, or more probably simply force majeur in the shape of ever-increasing student numbers.
But Oxford had been ruminating the great sea change before it happened.
The 1951 Epstein statue of Lazarus, who, of course, rose from the dead, looks quite at home in the 16th-century New College chapel, as do the abstract stained-glass windows by John Piper in the chapel of mock-medieval Nuffield.
Icy Nuffield College
Begun in 1949, the buildings of Nuffield College by Austin Harrison have a Lutyen-esque feel.
From the archives – Nuffield College’s architecture
Posted on November 28, 2014	by Nuffield College Library
In 1937, Lord Nuffield gave £900,000 and the site that Nuffield College now sits on to the University of Oxford so that a new college could be created.
In 1938, distinguished architect Austen Harrison was appointed and began to draw up plans.
The library holds in its archive, Nuffield College Papers, details on the appointment of Harrison to design Nuffield College, original plans, information on compromises and changes that had to be made, as well as an interview with the architect conducted by former warden Norman Chester.
Harrison’s original plans for the college were very Middle Eastern in their appearance but disliked by Lord Nuffield who is reported to have wanted something more in keeping with Oxford with “domes and pinnacles and things” (interview with Harrison, box A8, track 2 below).
Nuffield College Library was never originally supposed to be housed in the tower as it is now but in the additional building in Worcester Street car park that was never constructed.
It was thought that the shorter octagonal tower would be too low in relation to the castle mound opposite and a taller tower, that we see today, would “lift the College out of its sunken site on to the skyline of Oxford” (box A8/1/7).
The interview between Norman Chester and Austen Harrison conducted in 1970 is available below via SoundCloud, split into four tracks because of the original recording technique.
Ink and Stone: Nuffield College
The more I read about Oxford architecture, the more I realise that architectural historians are, for the most part, hyper-critical narcissists.
In keeping with this cliché of excessive negativity, I’d like to reproduce some of the choice quotes that have been expressed in relation to Nuffield College.
“Oxford’s biggest monument to barren reaction”; “a hodge-podge from the start”; “a gauche parody of the steeples of medieval Oxford” or that the “best hope for the college is vegetation.”
The college was built in 1949 on the former site of the Oxford canal basin – it’s situated on New Road, opposite the car park – so the next time you’ll walk past it will probably be on the way to Park End.
Stylistically, it could almost fit into the standard cottage model of so many of Oxford’s outlying villages – expressed in archetypal honey-coloured Cotswold stone.
This was not what architect Austen Harrison first envisaged when he started work on Nuffield – the noted designer of several buildings for the diplomatic core in the Middle East, including the high commissioner’s residence in Jerusalem.
Lord Nuffield, the benefactor behind the founding of the college, rejected Harrison’s initial plans as being “un-English”.
Lord Nuffield was, of course, William Morris (not that one) – the founder of Morris Motors, whose interwar car factories so transformed the outskirts of eastern Oxford.
This entrenched doublethink – the nostalgic moderniser, lies at the heart of the curious beauty of this much maligned piece of Oxford’s landscape, which may not deserve a reappraisal by those who actually know about architecture, but certainly deserves a few minutes of your attention.
Nuffield College, Oxford
Nuffield College, Oxford
Colleges and halls of the University of Oxford
Nuffield College
College name 	Nuffield College
Named after 	William Morris, Lord Nuffield
Nuffield College, Oxford
Location of Nuffield College within central OxfordCoordinates: 51°45'10?
Nuffield College /'n?fi?ld/ is one of the constituent colleges of the University of Oxford in England.
Its architecture is designed to conform to the traditional college layout and its modernist spire is a landmark for those approaching Oxford from the west.
[1] This makes it the fourth richest Oxford college by assets.
Nuffield College was founded in 1937 after a donation to the University by the industrialist and the founder of Morris Motors Lord Nuffield.
On 16 November 1937 the university entered a Deed of Covenant and Trust with Lord Nuffield.
[3] He donated land for the college on New Road, to the west of the city centre near the mound of Oxford Castle, on the site of the largely disused basin of the Oxford Canal.
[4] As well as the land, Nuffield gave £900,000[n 1] to build the college and to provide it with an endowment fund.
[3][6] For the creation of Nuffield College and for his other donations he was described in 1949 by an editorial in The Times as "the greatest benefactor of the University since the Middle Ages".
From its inception, Nuffield College initiated a number of trends at both Oxford and Cambridge.
Nuffield is located on the site of the basin of the Oxford Canal to the west of Oxford.
The architect Austen Harrison, who had worked in Greece and Palestine, was appointed by the University to design the buildings.
Harrison reworked the plans, aiming for "something on the lines of Cotswold domestic architecture",[6] as Nuffield wanted.
The plans were approved by Lord Nuffield in 1940.
It was the first tower built in Oxford for 200 years and is about 150 feet (46 m) tall, including the flèche on top.
The chapel has stained glass windows designed by John Piper.
The architectural aesthetic of the final design, particularly the tower and its fleche, has attracted some criticism; unlike the other "dreaming spires" of Oxford, Nuffield's tower is a masonry-clad steel-framed book-stack.
The architectural historian Sir Howard Colvin said that Harrison's first design was Oxford's "most notable architectural casualty of the 1930s";[8] it has also been described as a "missed opportunity" to show that Oxford did not live "only in the past".
In the 1960s, it was described as "Oxford's biggest monument to barren reaction".
The travel writer Jan Morris wrote that the college was "a hodge-podge from the start".
[12] However, the architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner, although unimpressed with most of the college, thought that the tower helped the Oxford skyline and predicted it would "one day be loved".
[13] The writer Simon Jenkins doubted Pevsner's prediction, and claimed that "vegetation" was the "best hope" for the tower – as well as the rest of the college.
Around a third of Nuffield's fellows hold appointments at the University of Oxford as lecturers, readers or professors.
It was the birthplace of the "Oxford School" of Industrial Relations; it pioneered the development of cost benefit analysis for developing countries; and it has made a major contribution to the methodology of econometrics.
Aerial view showing Nuffield College and Castle Mound
The spire of Nuffield is prominent in the Oxford skyline
Nuffield College from the top of Castle Mound
Virtual Tour of Nuffield College
Nuffield College was founded in 1937 and was originally funded by William Morris, Lord Nuffield.
The original plan for the college to occupy land on both sides of Worcester Street was scaled down and the College buildings were designed by Austen Harrison.
The modernistic spire, which is a landmark for those approaching Oxford from the west, tops a masonry-clad steel-framed book-stack housing the college library.
Nuffield College was founded by Deed of Covenant and Trust between the Right Honourable William Richard, Baron Nuffield of Nuffield, and the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxford on 16 Nov. 1937.
Under this deed Viscount Nuffield gave to the University a site to the north of the Castle mound and a sum of £900,000 for the building and endowment of a college.
Though not resident in Oxford they are full members of the college and its governing body.
The students are not confined to Oxford or the United Kingdom, and in point of fact graduates from overseas have always constituted part of the student body.
The plan of the building is in traditional Oxford style, with an exterior of Clipsham stone and stone tiles.
Central Oxford Regeneration Scheme Announced
A major £200 million mixed-use scheme, which will breathe new life into the heart of Oxford, has moved a step closer following the purchase of key land in the Oxpens area and the signing of a historic joint venture between Nuffield College, Oxford and Oxford City Council.
Oxford City Council and Nuffield College have formed a joint venture company and acquired land from London and Continental Railways and Oxford City Council in the heart of Oxford's West End that will see a new neighbourhood created with hundreds of new homes, offices and possibly a hotel.
The acquisition ends years of uncertainty over the Oxpens area and complements Nuffield College’s acquisition of the Jam Factory and Island Site from Christ Church last year.
The Oxpens site is one of the largest development areas within the Oxford West End action area and lies almost opposite the new John Lewis, conveniently located between the new Westgate shopping centre and Oxford railway station.
The Council has stated that the Oxpens development is a strategic priority in the Oxford City Deal and the Oxfordshire Strategic Economic Plan, unlocking major private sector investment and jobs as well as delivering significant wider benefits.
Nuffield College Bursar Gwilym Hughes said: “We have made a real breakthrough and are very excited about these plans.
We see this site as playing a pivotal key role in addressing the lack of affordable housing for a wide range of people in Oxford.
“The regeneration of the West End will be of huge benefit to everyone and I cannot think of a groundbreaking approach like this that has been taken in Oxford before.
Mr Hughes said it was hoped academic buildings for the College and Oxford University in the West End could be combined with new homes, commercial and leisure buildings, in a bid to create a “cluster” for the social sciences and vibrant public spaces.
Bidwells and Minns Estates are advising Nuffield College, whilst JLL are advising Oxford City Council.
This will detail the development of the College and try to assess the impact of the College on the Social Sciences and the University of Oxford.
Nuffield College, which was founded in 1937, is located in the centre of Oxford.
The College was the first Oxford College to have
The College buildings were designed by Austen Harrison.
The College was originally funded by William Morris (Lord Nuffield) a local businessman who founded Morris Motors Ltd.
In the late 1950s additional resources to complete the buildings were provide by the Nuffield Foundation, a seperate charity also setup by Lord Nuffield.
Oxford (England) - Description and travel.; Oxford (England); Oxford
Few cities, ' Jan Morris observes, 'have been much more loved, loathed, and celebrated.'
A book of outstanding excellence, with a sweep of knowledge and a distinction of style such as I have never before encountered in a work of this sort ... Brilliant alike in observation and imagination ... brings the very stones of Oxford to life'Sunday Telegraph.
Read associated articles: Buildings of Nuffield College, Oxford, Hebdomadal Council, Oxford
It was in the brick-built Oxfordshire villa pictured below that William Morris, founder of Morris Motors, lived from 1933 until his death 30 years later.
Featured in Simon Jenkins's England's 1,000 Best Houses, the building survives as the complete, furnished home of a 1930s industrialist who was at once the richest man in England - and the nation's greatest philanthropist.
"Morris and his wife grew up in ordinary terraced houses in East Oxford," Dr Head continued, "but unlike many modern millionaires, they didn't live a life of luxury and didn't show-off with collections of paintings or antiques.
William Morris began his working life at 16 James Street, Oxford, as a repairer of bicycles in the shed at the bottom of his father's garden.
Large-scale production later moved to Cowley where, in 1913, he introduced the first Morris Oxford car.
Created a Baron the following year, he took the name Lord Nuffield in tribute to his new home.
Lord Nuffield owned nearby Huntercombe Golf Course, where he played his favourite sport, and acquired the Place to be close to the links.
As Dr Head indicated, however, the downstairs sitting room offered a more intimate setting for Lord Nuffield and his wife, Elizabeth.
Though some furniture in the house is antique, much was custom-made by Cecil A Halliday of Oxford, and is of skilled 20th-century craftsmanship.
For a business mogul, Lord Nuffield was remarkably unostentatious - indeed frugal in his living.
In 1937 he endowed four Medical Professorship at the University of Oxford, at a cost of £2m.
Dr Steve Head told me: Every time I visit the house, I spot an extra detail, some perfect contemporary object that opens a window through to the 1930s, or shows the can-do attitude of Lord Nuffield.
Nuffield College, the Nuffield Trust and the Nuffield Foundation all owe their existence to the philanthropist.
Lord Nuffield had ordered them for the coronation of Edward VIII, a friend and golfing companion.
Lord and Lady Nuffield had no children, and when the magnate died in 1963, Nuffield College inherited the house and estate to be preserved intact.
We need to raise between £2 to £3m to buy the house from Nuffield College.
"This is part of Oxfordshire's heritage, and there must be thousands of local families with a direct connection back to the Cowley works, or to one of Nuffield's hospital departments.
