Boydell Shakespeare Gallery

Picturing Shakespeare: the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery
In November 1786 the printer Josiah Boydell held a dinner at his London home to which he invited several leading artists including George Romney and Benjamin West.
The discussion turned to the idea of creating a lavishly illustrated edition of Shakespeare’s plays.
As John Boydell wrote in his preface to the first catalogue of the Gallery “no subjects seem so proper to form an English School of Historical Painting, as the scenes of the immortal Shakespeare; yet it must be always remembered, that he possessed powers which no pencil can reach”.
Earlier this week art historian Paul Lewis gave a lecture to the Stratford-upon-Avon Shakespeare Club on the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery which put the Gallery in its historical context and suggested that the paintings and engravings are worthy of the revival of interest which they’re currently receiving.
Andrew Graham-Dixon reports on an exhibition dedicated to a forgotten school of British history painting
Henry Fuseli was a Swiss-born history painter whose ''Milton Gallery'' - an exhibition of large paintings based for the most part on Paradise Lost - turned out to be a resounding flop when opened to the public in London in 1799.
The Boydell Shakespeare Gallery
The Boydell Shakespeare Gallery
Introduction: The Boydell Shakespeare Gallery
An exhibition of paintings devoted exclusively to scenes from the dramatic works of Shakespeare was opened to the London populace in June, 1789.
The promoter of the Shakespeare Gallery was "Alderman" John Boydell (who acquired that title in 1782, and would become Lord Mayor in 1790).
In November 1786, at a dinner hosted by Josiah Boydell at his Hampstead home, the evening conversation turned to the possibility of producing "a fine Edition of Shakespeare" that might rival the elegant volumes with which the French celebrated their foremost authors.
From these paintings, Boydell would have two sets of engravings made: large ones to be gathered in an imperial folio album without text; small ones to be incorporated in George Steevens's edition of the text.
The two-volume collection of 100 large copper-plate engravings (crown folio), A Collection of Prints, from Pictures for the Purpose of illustrating the Dramatic Works of Shakespeare, by the Artists of Great Britain (London, 1803 [1805]), was intended as supplement to the elegant edition, The Dramatic Works of Shakespeare, 9 vols.
(London, 1791-1802), which already included the first series of 100 smaller copper-plate engravings (quarto).
Although John Boydell may have intended to lend his support to history painting, he was, in fact, encouraging a rival genre of theater painting, competing with, yet very much influenced by, the more traditional genre.
The images of the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery, as evident in the examples of Beaumont and Constable, are repeated and varied in the art of several ensuing decades.
The problems of displacing verbal with visual signs, visual with verbal signs, contributes significantly to the complexity of the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery and its reception in contemporary reviews and in the criticism of Christian Gottlob Heyne, Ludwig Tieck, and Georg Forster in Germany, and subsequently of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, William Hazlitt, and Charles Lamb in England.
Boydell Shakespeare Gallery - Illustrated Shakespeare Edition and Folio
Boydell was responsible for the "splendor", and George Steevens, the general editor, was responsible for the "correctness of text".
There are 96 illustrations in the nine volumes of the illustrated edition and each play has at least one.
Read more about this topic:  Boydell Shakespeare Gallery
John Boydell - Shakespeare Venture
The project contained three parts: an illustrated edition of Shakespeare's plays, a public gallery of paintings depicting scenes from the plays, and a folio of prints based on the paintings.
The idea of a grand Shakespeare edition was conceived at a dinner at Josiah Boydell’s home in November 1786.
Boydell was responsible for the "splendor", and George Steevens, a renowned Shakespearean editor, was responsible for the "correctness of text".
Two reviews from the most influential newspapers in London at the time solidified and validated the public's interest in the project and the artists' efforts.
Read more about this topic:  John Boydell
ANTIQUE "August" W HAMILTON/F BARTOLOZZI John Boydell PRINT
Published by John & Josiah Boydell, London.
Bartolozzi R.A. Sculp”, at the bottom left corner is printed “W.Hamilton R.A. Pinx”, and in the center is “Published By John & Josiah Boydell London".
The originals were published by John and Josiah Boydell (London) and similar work by the same artist has been sold by Christie’s Auction House and realized over $6,700 USD.
- John and Josiah Boydell, publishers in London who published the set, and were also artists and engravers.
It has been said that John Boydell had, almost single-handedly, made British prints a viable economic commodity and had demolished the French domination of the trade.
"Historical painting and engraving are almost exclusively indebted to Mr. Boydell for their present advancement" (London Times, May 7, 1789).
Francesco Bartolozzi (Florence 21 September 1727 – 7 March 1815 Lisbon) was an Italian engraver, whose most productive period was spent in London.
He soon returned to Venice and left for London in 1764.
He lived in London for nearly forty years.
Soon after arriving in London, he was appointed 'Engraver to the King' with an annual salary of £300.
The British painter William Hamilton, draftsman and book illustrator, was born in Chelsea in 1751, and died in London in 1801.
Hamilton returned to London by 1768 and enrolled in studies at the Royal Academy beginning in 1769.
John Boydell (19 January 1720 (New Style) – 12 December 1804) was an 18th-century British publisher noted for his reproductions of engravings.
In the 1790s, Boydell began a large Shakespeare venture that included the establishment of a Shakespeare Gallery, the publication of an illustrated edition of Shakespeare's plays, and the release of a folio of prints depicting scenes from Shakespeare's works.
In 1790 he became Lord Mayor of London.
Boydell was born, according to his monument in St Olave Old Jewry, London, at Dorrington, in the parish of Woore, Shropshire, to Josiah and Mary Boydell (née Milnes) and was educated at least partially at Merchant Taylors' School.
In 1739 he became house steward to MP John Lawton and accompanied him to London.
In either 1740 or 1741, Boydell saw a print of Hawarden Castle by William Henry Toms and was so delighted with it that he immediately set out again for London to learn printmaking and Lloyd promised to wait for him.
This single act of patronage raised engravers' fees throughout London.
The project contained three parts: an illustrated edition of Shakespeare's plays, a public gallery of paintings depicting scenes from the plays, and a folio of prints based on the paintings.
The idea of a grand Shakespeare edition was conceived at a dinner at Josiah Boydell’s home in November 1786.
Boydell was responsible for the "splendor", and George Steevens, a renowned Shakespearean editor, was responsible for the "correctness of text".
Two reviews from the most influential newspapers in London at the time solidified and validated the public's interest in the project and the artists' efforts.
Amidst all of the work generated by these publishing enterprises, Boydell still found time to be alderman of Cheap ward in 1782, master of the Stationers' Company in 1783, sheriff of London in 1785, and Lord Mayor of London in 1790.
He frequently donated paintings from his own collections to the Corporation of London to be hung in the Guildhall.
It may be a matter of wonder to some, what enducements I could have to present the City of London with so many expensive Pictures; the principal reasons that influence me were these: First: to show my respect for the Corporation, and my Fellow Citizens, Secondly: to give pleasure to the Public, and Foreigners in general, Thirdly: to be of service to the Artists, by shewing their works to the greatest advantage: and, Fourthly: for the mere purpose of pleasing myself.
According to Josiah, John Boydell caught a cold by going to the Old Bailey on a damp, foggy day to do his duty as an alderman.
Josiah Boydell (18 January 1752 – 27 March 1817) was a British publisher and painter, whose main achievement was the establishment of the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery with his uncle, John Boydell.
In 1766, at the age of 14, he moved to London to begin his seven-year apprenticeship to Samuel's brother, John Boydell.
After completing his apprenticeship, he continued to work closely with John Boydell, making some engravings himself and drawing scenes for others.
Boydell Shakespeare Gallery - Boydell's Shakespeare Venture
Boydell's Shakespeare project contained three parts: an illustrated edition of Shakespeare's plays; a folio of prints from the gallery (originally intended to be a folio of prints from the edition of Shakespeare's plays); and a public gallery where the original paintings for the prints would hang.
Boydell and Nicol wanted to produce an illustrated edition of a multi-volume work and intended to bind and sell the 72 large prints separately in a folio.
In the middle of the project, Boydell decided that he could make more money if he published different prints in the folio than in the illustrated edition; as a result, the two sets of images are not identical.
The subscribers were primarily middle-class Londoners, not aristocrats.
To enter London’s fashionable Shakespeare Gallery, visitors would have passed under a sculpture depicting William Shakespeare flanked by the Dramatic Muse and the Genius of Painting.
The Gallery’s founder, John Boydell (1719–1804), made his fortune by providing engraved prints from famous collections of art, then selling the prints in England and abroad.
Boydell's London
Boydell's London
Masterminded by David Garrick, a popular actor and manager of London’s Drury Lane theatre, the Shakespeare Jubilee prompted the manufacture of many Shakespearean products, from vases and snuff boxes to figurines and ceramic tiles, all honoring Shakespeare and the actors who brought his works to life.
One such person was John Boydell, a prominent print seller, publisher, and politician who was elected Alderman for Cheapside in 1782, Sheriff of London in 1785, and Lord Mayor of London in 1790.
John Boydell, Esq., Alderman of London.
John Boydell.
London: Published by John and Josiah Boydell: Printed by W. Bulmer, 1803.
Handcolored frontispiece in John Boydell's A collection of prints, from pictures painted for the purpose of illustrating the dramatic works of Shakspeare, by the artists of Great-Britain.
London: Published by John and Josiah Boydell: Printed by W. Bulmer, 1803.
To promote a school of British history painting and improve the national taste, Boydell needed a rich subject matter.
Boydell opened the Shakspeare Gallery in Pall Mall, one of London’s most sophisticated neighborhoods, in the fall social season of 1789—less than three years from the date of his advertisement.
London, 1800.
In John Boydell's A collection of prints, from pictures painted for the purpose of illustrating the dramatic works of Shakspeare, by the artists of Great-Britain.
London: Published by John and Josiah Boydell: Printed by W. Bulmer, 1803.
John Boydell.
London, 1796.
London, 1789.
London, 1796.
Engraving, London, 1796.
London: Pub.
[London, England]: H. Humphrey, 1791.
In Dublin, James Woodmason opened his Irish Shakespeare Gallery in 1793 before moving it to London the next year.
By January 16, 1794, Woodmason reopened his gallery in London, where it remained open until March 1795.
London, 1794–5.
An enterprising print-dealer, publisher, and alderman named John Boydell opened the first-ever Shakespeare museum in 1789.
This website reconstructs the main interior of Boydell's Shakespeare Gallery as it looked in August of 1796, when novelist Jane Austen visited London.
Because most of Boydell's paintings, which were dispersed at auction in 1805, are now deemed lost, and the building itself was destroyed in 1870, a digital reconstruction is, once again, the only way to see what Jane Austen, our synecdotal avatar for thousands of eighteenth-century London sightseers, witnessed first hand.
The gallery was the first of an ambitious three-part entrepreneurial plan to define Britishness with contemporary art.
John Boydell (1720-1804) similarly wished to foster a nationalist celebration of Shakespeare that might endorse his brand of art, namely contemporary engravings.
Boydell Shakespeare Gallery
The Boydell Shakespeare Gallery was a collection of pictures commissioned by 18th-century engraver and publisher John Boydell in an effort to foster a school of British history painting.
The project contained three parts: an illustrated edition of Shakespeare's plays, a folio of prints from the gallery, and a public gallery where the original paintings for the prints hung.
The project was conceived at a dinner in November 1786, the gallery opened in May 1788, and the entire contents were sold and dispersed in 1805.
