Annunciation (Memling)

Despite its superficial Victorian trappings, the iconography of the image that Birkerts alludes to is likely derived from an older image of female purity and piety: the Annunciation of the Angel Gabriel to a reading Virgin Mary, which is often shown in a hortus conclusus or enclosed garden from the Song of Songs.
One owner of a fifteenth-century illuminated manuscript, Maria of Gueldern, was even depicted in this pose of reading in the garden with two attending angels, perhaps in anticipation of being blessed with children herself (Figure 2).
There is another tradition of the reading Virgin, however, in which visual identification with the female reading subject is problematized through the use of iconographic conventions that draw attention to the spatial and temporal complexities of the Annunciation scene.
This other tradition of the literate Virgin reaches its apogee in fifteenth-century Flemish panel painting in the work of Robert Campin, Jan van Eyck, and Rogier van der Weyden.
The image of the reading Virgin became a popular subject for book illustration in the Late Medieval and Early Modern periods, particularly as "prayer" became an act of literacy rather than articulate speech.
The supplanting of "recitation" by "reading" had other effects on book culture, like the development of dominant prose forms or divisions by chapter (Huizinga 295), which are also documented in images of the reading Virgin, but the development of popular theology changed the iconography of the ideal reader as well as the ideal text.
Jean Pucelle’s Annunciation panel in the Hours of Jeanne d’Evreux is key to Panofsky’s argument, because it reconfigures the two-dimensional plane of the page with the three-dimensional architecture of the Virgin’s chamber, thereby creating opportunities for multiple apertures and enclosures that suggest both exterior and interior spaces (Figure 3).
Although the lectern of the Virgin has receded into the background, books and reading are still important motifs in the scene: in the bottom left corner we can see the female patron reading inside the capital "D."
Panofsky notes that Broederlam’s Annunciation is a transitional piece in which the iconography of the manual Virgin and the iconography of the literate Virgin intersect:
In this semiotic system the cult of Saint Anne flourished and images of her educative role in the life of the Mary, particularly those of her teaching the Virgin to read, were very popular.
For a middle-class literate public, the iconography of a reading Virgin presented a female ideal.
In images of the Annunciation, the Virgin Mary functioned as an ideal reader for both laywomen and nuns, but the actual text presented as the object of consumption in the scene was not necessarily particularized.
As the author intended, this interpretation made the Virgin a very suitable rôle-model for nuns.
Some of the books that Mary holds in Annunciation scenes accordingly display the opening words of the Hours of the Virgin, which could be repeated by the worshipper ‘off stage’.
Now it is Joseph who is occupied with "manual" labors, while the Virgin is so absorbed in the activity of devotional reading that she has not yet noticed Gabriel’s entrance in priest’s robes.
The vase with lilies that signifies the Virgin’s purity is presented as a three-dimensional object with a glossy surface that in turn merits "reading" itself with a line of letters up its side.
(It is likely that this Annunciation was painted by Robert Campin, perhaps with the assistance of a young Rogier van der Weyden.)
Although the Virgin would seem to occupy a more explicitly bourgeois domestic space than in the Dijon Altarpiece, Barbara Lane interprets the Virgin’s act of reading as taking place in the context of a sanctuary.
Unlike the female reading subject of the Merode Altarpiece, the Virgins of Rogier van der Weyden’s Annunciation paintings are not absorbed in the contemplation of the texts before them (Figures 6 and 7).
This may be the first representation of the Virgin in the thalamus or bedroom of which Ludolf the Carthusian speaks as separate from the secretarium cubiculum, an oratory or place of worship, and the conclavus or sealed room in the house of Nazarath (De Vos 199).
Late in the Flemish Primitive tradition, we see an utterly bourgeois thalamus that serves as the space of the Virgin reading in the work of Joos van Cleve, complete with tacked-up holy pictures and ostentatious furnishings (Figure 8).
If the act of the Virgin reading would seem to be associated with the space of reading, the depiction of that space has particular implications for the social and political context in which images of women's literacies can be understood.
For example, the conventional text that the Virgin is supposed to be reading is the passage from Isaiah 7:14 that predicts her conception with the Christ child: "Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign.
For example, despite its anachronisms, Dirc Bout's Triptych of the Virgin leads the viewer through a logical temporal sequence from left to right: Annunciation, Visitation, and Nativity (Figure 10).
The problematic construction of temporality in spatial terms is perhaps most clearly articulated by the Washington Annunciation of Jan van Eyck in which the Virgin’s act of reading takes place in a church with a ruined ceiling, which is decorated with narrative elements from the Hebrew Scriptures (Figure 11).
However Carolyn Purtle argues in a recent Art Bulletin article that there is a tradition in manuscript illumination that makes the connection between the Virgin’s body and the "body" of the church explicit.
For Purtle, as the Holy Spirit enters the body of the reading Virgin in the moment of Annunciation, it also enters the church, which is manifested as both a physical edifice and a community of worshippers.
The Virgin even raises her arms in a gesture that would have been familiar to its audience as the expansus manibus position recommended in liturgical directives.
To place Mary in this scene would seem to risk heresy, but other depictions of the Virgin in the Annunciation scene go so far as to present her in priests’ robes.
From this limited number of paintings in this particular fifteenth-century tradition, it would seem that the more that the activity of the reading Virgin is constituted by the space of public worship, the more her attention is directed to gestures of ritual rather than close reading.
In a work of visual art questions of attention as it is manifested through gaze are critical, and the way that the viewer interprets the Virgin’s gaze directs his or her gaze in and through the Annunciation scene.
To demonstrate this point I would like to provide some extended analysis of two Annunciation scenes set in the thalamus: one by Petrus Christus (Figure 12) and one by Hans Memling (Figure 13).
In both of these works our attention is directed to the book as a represented object with a particular page or pages: in the Petrus Christus painting the Virgin is either turning a page or displaying the page to the viewer; in the Memling painting she gestures to an open page on the lectern.
If we compare these paintings to the Gerard David painting (Figure 9), in which the Virgin has allowed the pages to close even though the book is nominally open, the difference between text as a uniform icon and text as a site of multiple texts becomes clearer.
The Christus painting shows the Virgin reading in an interior space that opens onto a set of exterior spaces.
Unlike the Van der Weyden Annunciation from the Columba altarpiece that shows a closed and possibly locked door to the Virgin’s chamber, this Annunciation shows a large and airy entrance that opens onto what would seem to be the hortus conclusus of the other Annunciation tradition, and behind that bricked in grassy space the scene takes in the commerce of boat traffic going by.
The generic iconography is clear, and it includes the Holy Ghost as dove above the Virgin’s head and the vase of lilies in the foreground.
But in this painting the Virgin’s gesture is more difficult to interpret, and less clearly analogous to others in the genre.
If we follow the lines of sight of Gabriel and the Virgin, who are looking toward each other, the significance of her action with the book is not any clearer, and as viewers our gaze is directed not at the book but through the windows to the contemporary world outside.
Memling’s Annunciation makes the relationship between the Virgin’s body and her text much more explicit.
In the liturgical tradition the Virgin is "praying," but as prayer becomes a literate act in the Early Modern Period, the iconography of prayer in Netherlandish painting becomes associated with the iconography of reading.
The penetration and appropriation of the Virgin body by the word of God brings special significance to these images of the reading woman.
In the case of the Virgin, a miracle of transubstantiation is linked to the act of textual appropriation: physical conception and intellectual conception are one, and her interaction with scripture is critical to our interpretation of the scene.
As the Word becomes flesh in the Memling Annunciation, we see the Virgin pointing to a page in the text, which is clearly individuated although the letters in the book are simulated (De Vos 304).
In Memling's Annunciation we see that the gaze of one of the attending angels is focused on her womb, where the word of God is already becoming flesh and swelling below her drapery.
Many depictions of the Annunciation illustrate church dogma in which the word of God enters through Mary's ear, perhaps because penetration through the auditory canal seems to offer a logical solution to the problem posed by the mechanics of conception for a vaginally intact Virgin (Neumann 317).
Often the Virgin cocks her ear toward the arriving angel, so that, in these examples, auditory perception is emphasized over visual perception, and the female subject’s identity as a listener is more important than her identity as a reader in the scene.
The Virgin’s arms are crossed, her ear is cocked to privilege her auditory senses over her visual ones, and her unfocused and possibly ecstatic gaze is turned away from her large open book.
Hans Memling: The Complete Works.
Rogier van der Weyden: The Complete Works.
New York: Routledge, 1992.
New York: Doubleday, 1954.
New York: Norton, 1985.
New York: Norton, 1981.
New York: Harper and Row, 1984.
The Annunciation by Hans Memling
The Annunciation by Hans Memling, oil on panel, transferred to canvas, circa 1480-89.
Memling modeled this Annunciation on the left wing of Rogier van der Weyden's Saint Columba Altarpiece (now in Munich), but his innovative rendition portrays the Virgin swooning and supported by two angels, rather than kneeling.
Like other fifteenth-century Flemish painters working in the wake of Jan van Eyck, Hans Memling cloaked religious imagery in the pictorial language of everyday life, paying close attention to naturalistic detail.
The carafe of water, through which light passes uncorrupted, and the vase of lilies are symbols of the Virgin's purity, while the empty candleholder signifies her imminent role as bearer of Christ, light of the world.
A soft glowing light falls on the Virgin and suffuses the room, elevating the scene from the realm of the ordinary and signaling the sacred nature of the drama.
The Annunciation, also referred to as the Annunciation to the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Annunciation of Our Lady or Annunciation of the Lord, is the Christian celebration of the announcement by the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary that she would conceive and become the mother of Jesus, the Son of God, marking his Incarnation.
Artist:Hans Memling (Netherlandish, Seligenstadt, active by 1465–died 1494 Bruges)
Memling modeled this Annunciation on the left wing of Rogier van der Weyden’s Saint Columba Altarpiece (now in Munich), but his innovative rendition portrays the Virgin swooning and supported by two angels, rather than kneeling.
Like other fifteenth-century Flemish painters working in the wake of Jan van Eyck, Hans Memling cloaked religious imagery in the pictorial language of everyday life, paying close attention to naturalistic detail.
The carafe of water, through which light passes uncorrupted, and the vase of lilies are symbols of the Virgin's purity, while the empty candleholder signifies her imminent role as bearer of Christ, light of the world.
A soft glowing light falls on the Virgin and suffuses the room, elevating the scene from the realm of the ordinary and signaling the sacred nature of the drama.
Hans Memling (14)
Hans Memling portrait of The Annunciation was Gabriel's annunciation of the birth of Christ to the Virgin Mary.
By Hans Memling
Hans Memling (1430-1494) recieved numerous commissions from the city's wealthy merchants.
When I first viewed the painting called "The Annunciation" by Hans Memling I noticed the vibrant colors and beautiful gowns that were worn by the people in the painting.
by Hans Memling
Hans Memling (c.1433-94)
Seen today as one of the outstanding Flemish painters, his best known works include the Last Judgment Triptych (1471, Narodowe Museum, Gdansk), The Donne Triptych (The Virgin and Child with Saints and Donors) (1477-80, National Gallery, London), The Mystical Marriage of St Catherine (1479, Memling Museum, Bruges), and Earthly Vanity and Divine Salvation (c.1485, Fine Arts Museum, Strasbourg).
See also The Virgin of the Rose Garden and The Seven Joys of Mary (both pre-1480, Alte Pinakothek, Munich).
Hans Memling (or Memlinc) was born in born in Seligenstad, Hessen in about 1433, or before 1440.
It is believed he may have apprenticed in Cologne or Mainz, before moving to Brussels to work with Rogier van der Weyden.
Another notable portrait is Tommaso Portinari and Maria Portinari (1468, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York).
The Annunciation (1480–1489, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), is another famous oil painting by the Bruges master.
The vase of lilies represent purity, the carafe of water allows light pass through uncorrupted and the empty candleholder signifies the Virgin's imminent role as the mother of Christ.
Paintings by Hans Memling can be seen in several of the best art museums in the world, in particular the Memling Museum, St John's Hospital, Bruges.
Hans Memling: biography
Hans Memling was one of the most important Early Netherlandish painters (also known as 'the Flemish primitives').
Although we do not know much about Hans Memling, compared to other 15th-century artists, a significant number of his works have been preserved.
He was presumably a collaborator of Rogier van der Weyden, as can be deducted from several sources.
Thus, Memling's drawing style in the Crabbe Triptych is very close to the one used by Rogier van der Weyden.
Despite the important stylistic similarities in the paint layers and the underlying drawings in his early works, Memling was never a slavish follower of Rogier van der Weyden.
Hans Memling, reverse wings of the Moreel triptych with St. John the Baptist and St. George, 1484, Groeninge museum, Bruges.
Maryan W. Ainsworth, ‘Hans Memling as a draughtsman', in: Dirk de Vos (ed.)
, Hans Memling, essays, Brugge 1994, pp. 78-87.
Portretten van Hans Memling, Till-Holger Borchert (ed.)
Hans Memling au Louvre, Parijs 1995.
Portretten van Hans Memling, Brugge 2005.
Portretten van Hans Memling, Till-Holger Borchert (ed.)
Hans Memling, Brugge 1994.
Dirk de Vos, Hans Memling, Het volledige oeuvre, Antwerpen 1994.
Dirk de Vos, ‘Hans Memling', in: Dictionary of Art, Jane Turner (ed.)
Maximiliaan P. J. Martens, ‘De opdrachtgevers van Hans Memling', in: Dirk de Vos (ed.)
, Hans Memling, essays, Brugge 1994, pp. 14-29.
Portretten van Hans Memling, Till-Holger Borchert (ed.)
, Hans Memling, essays, Brugge 1994, pp. 67-77.
Michael Wolfson, ‘Den Duytschen Hans Memling and German panel painting of the mid-fifteenth century', Dirk de Vos (ed.)
, Hans Memling, essays, Brugge 1994, pp. 9-13.
For this week's Annunciation scene, the image is a painting by Hans Memling (an important Flemish painter), dating to around the year 1489.
Above Mary, you can see a hovering dove, the presence of God in the act of "overshadowing" Mary.
What is remarkable about this painting, however, is the presence of two more angels, one to the left and one to the right of Mary, who are supporting her in this overwhelming moment.
Does Mary see the angels?
One of the angels is looking directly out at us, the viewers of the painting.
This painting seems to suggest that Mary might feel the presence of those two angels without seeing them.
Artist: Hans Memling
Gallery: Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City
Title: Hans Memling's "Annunciation" with Angelic Attendants [the author argues that Memling's interpretation is unique in his emphasis on Mary and the doctrinal meaning of the moment of the incarnation; the author cites imagery and iconography that convey purity, the nuptial bed, and the blessed womb].
Subject (See Also): Art History- Painting Iconography Mary, Virgin, Saint- Annunciation in Art Memling, Hans, Painter- Annunciation Theology in Art Women in Art
Figure One Hans Memling, "The Annunciation," oil on panel (New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Robert Lehman Collection, 1975.1.113).
Figure Two Rogier van der Weyden, "The Annunciation," from the Columba Altarpiece, oil on panel (Alte Pinakothek).
Figure Three Rogier van der Weyden, "Annunciation," (Paris, Musée du Louvre).
Figure Five Robert Campin, "Annunciation," center panel from the Mérode Altarpiece, oil on panel (New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Cloisters Collection, 1956, 56.70).
File:Hans Memling - The Annunciation - WGA14967.jpg
Hans Memling (circa 1433–1494
