Acra (fortress)

(CNN)Archaeologists believe they have found the remains of the ancient Greek fort of Acra, solving "one of Jerusalem's greatest archaeological mysteries."
The stronghold ruins were unearthed from beneath a parking lot in Jerusalem, Israel's Antiquities Authority said.
Acra dates back more than 2,000 years, to the time of Greek ruler Antiochus IV Epiphanes.
Excavation directors Doron Ben-Ami, Yana Tchekhanovets and Salome Cohen called it a "sensational discovery."
Acra, which was occupied by mercenaries and Hellenized Jews, was built to consolidate the Seleucid Empire's control over the city.
The mystery of Acra had stumped experts for well over a century.
The Fortress of Acra.
The name Acra derived from the Greek acropolis and signified a lofty fortified place overlooking a town.
In Jerusalem, the word came to symbolize anti-Jewish paganism: a fortress of the "impious and wicked".
The Acra (or Akra, Hebrew: ????
a), was a fortified compound in Jerusalem built by Antiochus Epiphanes, ruler of the Seleucid Empire, following his sack of the city in 168 BCE.
The fortress played a significant role in the events surrounding the Maccabean Revolt and the formation of the Hasmonean Kingdom.
It was destroyed by Simon Maccabeus during this struggle.
Following Alexander the Great's death in 323 BCE, Judea was contested between the Ptolemaic Kingdom in Egypt, and the Seleucid Empire based in Syria and Mesopotamia.
The Jewish population of Jerusalem had aided Antiochus during his siege of the Baris, the fortified base of Jerusalem's Egyptian garrison.
The exact location of the Acra, critical to understanding Hellenistic Jerusalem, remains a matter of ongoing discussion.
Historians and archaeologists have proposed various sites around Jerusalem, relying mainly on conclusions drawn from literary evidence.
New discoveries have prompted reassessments of the ancient literary sources, Jerusalem's geography and previously discovered artifacts.
Yoram Tsafrir has interpreted a masonry joint in the southeastern corner of the Temple Mount platform as a clue to the Acra's possible position.
"Y'hudhah HaMakabi") defeated the Seleucid army during the Maccabean Revolt.
100),[4] after Antiochus IV's successful invasion of Ptolemaic Egypt was turned back by the intervention of the Roman Republic,[5][6] Antiochus instead moved to assert strict control over the Seleucid satrapy of Coele Syria and Phoenicia,[7] sacking Jerusalem and its Temple, suppressing Jewish and Samaritan religious and cultural observances,[7] and imposing Hellenistic practices.
The ensuing revolt by the Jews (167 BC) began a twenty-five-year period of Jewish independence potentiated by the steady collapse of the Seleucid Empire under attacks from the rising powers of the Roman Republic and the Parthian Empire.
At the beginning of the 2nd century BC, the Seleucid Empire (in yellow) expanded into Israel at the expense of Ptolemaic Egypt (blue).
The entire region was heavily contested between the successor states of Alexander's empire, the Seleucid Empire and Ptolemaic Egypt, during the six Syrian Wars of the 3rd–1st centuries BC: "After two centuries of peace under the Persians, the Hebrew state found itself once more caught in the middle of power struggles between two great empires: the Seleucid state with its capital in Syria to the north and the Ptolemaic state, with its capital in Egypt to the south...Between 319 and 302 BC, Jerusalem changed hands seven times."
Scholars refer to the state as the Hasmonean Kingdom to distinguish it from the previous kingdoms of Israel.
The name "Judaea" has also been used to describe the Hasmonean Kingdom although this name reflects the later designation of the region under the Romans at the time of Josephus' writings in the late 1st century.
[14] Author Lee I. Levine notes, "The 'piece de resistance' of Judaean Hellenization, and the most dramatic of all these developments, occurred in 175 BC, when the high priest Jason converted Jerusalem into a Greek polis replete with gymnasium and ephebeion (2 Maccabees 4).
Whether this step represents the culmination of a 150-year process of Hellenization within Jerusalem in general, or whether it was only the initiative of a small coterie of Jerusalem priests with no wider ramifications, has been debated for decades."
Antiochus IV against Jerusalem
[17] Returning toward Antioch, the troops of Antiochus sacked Jerusalem and removed the sacred objects from the Jerusalem Temple, slaughtering an unknown, but large, number of Jews:
and Jerusalem with a great multitude,
He then imposed a tax and established a fortress in Jerusalem.
He also outlawed observance of the Sabbath and the offering of sacrifices at the Jerusalem Temple and required Jewish leaders to sacrifice to idols; punitive executions were also instituted.
Maccabean Revolt
Main article: Maccabean Revolt
Most modern scholars argue that the king was intervening in a civil war between traditionalist Jews in the countryside and Hellenized Jews in Jerusalem.
"Bickermann saw the origin of the problem in the attempt of "Hellenized" Jews to reform the "antiquated" and "outdated" religion practiced in Jerusalem, and to rid it of superstitious elements.
They were the ones who egged on Antiochus IV and instituted the religious reform in Jerusalem.
He appears to have controlled the road from Jaffa to Jerusalem, and thus to have cut off the royal party in Acra from direct communication with the sea and thus with the government.
In 164 BC, Judah captured Jerusalem and the Temple in Jerusalem was freed and reconsecrated: "After having recovered Jerusalem, Judah ordered the Temple to be cleansed, a new altar to be built in place of the desecrated one, and new holy vessels to be made."
[37] Bacchides subdued Jerusalem and returned to his King.
Following the death of his puppet governor Alcimus, High Priest of Jerusalem, Bacchides felt secure enough to leave the country, but two years after the departure of Bacchides from Israel, the City of Acre felt sufficiently threatened by Maccabee incursions to contact Demetrius and request the return of Bacchides to their territory.
Jonathan gladly accepted these terms, took up residence at Jerusalem in 153 BC, and began fortifying the city.
Alexander Balas offered Jonathan even more favorable terms, including official appointment as High Priest in Jerusalem, and despite a second letter from Demetrius promising prerogatives that were almost impossible to guarantee,[42] Jonathan declared allegiance to Balas.
Balas appointed Jonathan as strategos and "meridarch" (i.e., civil governor of a province; details not found in Josephus), sent him back with honors to Jerusalem,[43] and refused to listen to the Hellenistic party's complaints against Jonathan.
Jonathan then returned to Jerusalem, maintaining peace with the King of Egypt despite their support for different contenders for the Seleucid throne.
Demetrius II Nicator remained sole ruler of the Seleucid Empire and became the second husband of Cleopatra Thea.
Jonathan owed no allegiance to the new King and took this opportunity to lay siege to the Acra, the Seleucid fortress in Jerusalem and the symbol of Seleucid control over Judea.
Jonathan in return lifted the siege of the Acra and left it in Seleucid hands.
Within a year of the death of Simon, Seleucid King Antiochus VII Sidetes attacked Jerusalem.
87 BC, according to Josephus, following a six-year civil war involving Seleucid king Demetrius III Eucaerus, Hasmonean ruler Alexander Jannaeus crucified 800 Jewish rebels in Jerusalem.
The conflict between Hyrcanus and Aristobulus culminated in a civil war that ended when the Roman general Pompey captured Jerusalem in 63 BC and inaugurated the Roman period of Jewish history.
Hyrcanus took refuge in the citadel of Jerusalem, but the capture of the Temple by Aristobulus II compelled Hyrcanus to surrender.
Aretas, bribed by Antipater, who also promised him the restitution of the Arabian towns taken by the Hasmoneans, readily espoused the cause of Hyrcanus and advanced toward Jerusalem with an army of fifty thousand.
Pompey in the Temple of Jerusalem, by Jean Fouquet
Pompey, who had just been awarded the title "Conqueror of Asia" due to his decisive victories in Asia Minor over Pontus and the Seleucid Empire, had decided to bring Judea under the rule of the Romans.
Aristobulus II entrenched himself in the fortress of Alexandrium; but, soon realizing the uselessness of resistance, surrendered at the first summons of the Romans, and undertook to deliver Jerusalem to them.
In 57–55 BC, Aulus Gabinius, proconsul of Syria, split the former Hasmonean Kingdom into Galilee, Samaria, and Judea, with five districts of legal and religious councils known as sanhedrin (Greek: s???
So these councils governed the people; the first was at Jerusalem, the second at Gadara, the third at Amathus, the fourth at Jericho, and the fifth at Sepphoris in Galilee."
Antipater appointed his sons to positions of influence: Phasael became Governor of Jerusalem, and Herod Governor of Galilee.
The taking of Jerusalem by Herod the Great, 36 BC (sic)
In that year Herod, who feared that Hyrcanus might induce the Parthians to help him regain the throne, invited him to return to Jerusalem.
The fall of the Hasmonean Kingdom marked an end to a century of Jewish self-governance, but Jewish nationalism and desire for independence continued under Roman rule, beginning with the Census of Quirinius in 6 and leading to a series of Jewish-Roman wars in the 1st–2nd centuries, including the Great Revolt (AD 66–73), the Kitos War (115–117), and Bar Kokhba's revolt (132–135).
Roman legions under Vespasian and Titus besieged and destroyed Jerusalem, looted and burned Herod's Temple (in the year 70) and Jewish strongholds (notably Gamla in 67 and Masada in 73), and enslaved or massacred a large part of the Jewish population.
Simon Maccabeus, 142–141 BC
(JNi.media) A fascinating, recent discovery appears to have solved one of Jerusalem’s biggest historical mysteries: the location of the Acra, the fortified compound in Jerusalem built by Antiochus Epiphanes, ruler of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire, following his sack of the city in 168 BCE.
The discovery of the ancient Akra was made recently at the archaeological excavations run by the Israel Antiquities Authority at the Givati ??
parking lot in the City of David, which is part of the national park that circles the walls of Jerusalem.
The excavation has already revealed many artifacts from various periods in Jerusalem’s history.
Over the past century of archaeological research in Jerusalem many proposals have been offered identifying the location of the Akra, which is mentioned in the books of the Maccabees and by Jewish historian Yosef Ben-Matityahu (Josephus Flavius).
The uncertainty about the compound’s location was created by the fact that there are very few artifacts dating back to the Hellenistic conquest and then its lingering presence in Jerusalem.
Researchers discovered lead sling stones, bronze arrowheads, and catapult stones in the site, branded with a pitchfork, a symbol of the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes.
In Jerusalem, it was he who was the first to notice the remains of the Third Wall; the first to suggest that Hezekiah's Tunnel was cut simultaneously from two ends (sixty years prior to the finding of the Siloam Inscription!)
In 1864 Wilson joined the Ordnance Survey of Jerusalem, and then participated in the surveying project of Jerusalem, initiated to improve the water system of the city.
A drawing of this wall segment was published by Warren in the Survey of Western Palestine, Jerusalem, Album, Pl.
Benjamin Mazar (1968-1978)
These excavations were conducted on behalf of the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, and the Israel Exploration Society.
From the Hellenistic period was found a huge bedrock surface, identified as the location of the Acra, south of the southern wall.
The excavation revealed important data on the history of Early Islamic Jerusalem.
These buildings are probably part of an official facility erected by the caliph Al-Walid, and shedding new light on the status of Jerusalem during the Islamic period.
The Israel Antiquities Authority (1994-2000)
by the people, assembled at Jerusalem; he at once completed the fortification of the capital, and made Joppa secure by expelling its Gentile inhabitants and filling it with Jews (I Macc.
§ 2), that Judah and Jerusalem were released from the payment of the "crown tax" (st?fa???)
The independence of Simon may be indicated also by the coins which he minted, for many Jewish shekels and half-shekels bear in Old Hebrew characters the inscription "Holy Jerusalem," and are dated variously "the year 1," "2," "3," "4," or "5," these dates being referred by many scholars to the era of Simon.
He then attacked the last bulwark of the Syrians in Judea, the Acra of Jerusalem, which was taken on the 23d day of the second month, 142 B.C., and entered by the Jews chanting hymns of thanksgiving to the sound of harps, and bearing palm-branches (I Macc.
Merited punishment was visited on the Hellenists (called "children of the Acra" in Meg.
At the siege of Dora he rejected the reenforcements sent by Simon, and demanded either that Simon should surrender Joppa, Gazara, and the Acra, which, he alleged, had been wrongfully taken by the Jews, or that he should pay an indemnity of one thousand talents.
Who knew that the answer to a mystery involving one of the key players in the story of Hanukkah was lurking under a parking lot in Jerusalem?!
In what archaeologists are describing as “a solution to one of the great archaeological riddles in the history of Jerusalem,” researchers with the Israel Antiquities Authority announced Tuesday that they have found the remnants of a fortress used by the Seleucid Greek king Antiochus Epiphanes in his siege of Jerusalem in 168 BCE.
The fortification is believed to have been part of a system of defenses known as the Acra fortress, built by Antiochus as he sought to quell a Jewish priestly rebellion centered on the Temple.
The Acra fortress was used by his Seleucids to oversee the Temple and maintain control over Jerusalem.
The Acra fortress in Jerusalem was quite unique in that it was not intended to protect the city directly, but built as an oppressive fortress to solidify control over the Jews.
In 168-7 BCE the Seleucid King Antiochus IV sacked the great city of Jerusalem.
To enforce his new laws and keep order the great fortress of Acra was built to house the Seleucid garrison tasked with keeping order and enforcing the oppressive laws.
Recent excavations place Acra in the southeast section of early Jerusalem known as the City of David which is the lowest area of Jerusalem.
Some sources say it was tall enough to see all of Jerusalem though this point is debatable.
During the period of its construction, there were many Hellenistic Jews who were allied or loyal to the Seleucid rule and the Acra fortress seems to have included a fortified neighborhood around it for the Hellenized Jews to live.
This would become known as the Maccabean Revolt and lasted until 160.
Over the course of the next few decades Seleucid and Jewish power fluctuated often, but the Acra fortress remained despite occasional attempts to besiege it.
Finally around 141 BCE Simon Maccabeus besieged the city and managed to capture it.
Sometime after its capture the Acra was destroyed or dismantled and lost to history until it was very recently excavated.
Recent excavations have uncovered strong evidence for the location of the Seleucid Acra.
The discovery firmly places the fortress in the lower City of David region.
The exact location of the Acra has been debated constantly and it is nice to have some concrete proof and from there hopefully some more details can be discovered, specifically the specific battles fought against the fortress and how it was actually captured.
For financial reasons Antiochus supported the reform party and, in return for a considerable sum, permitted the high priest, Jason, to build a gymnasium in Jerusalem and to introduce the Greek mode of educating young people.
In 169, however, while Antiochus was campaigning in Egypt, Jason conquered Jerusalem—with the exception of the citadel—and murdered many adherents of his rival Menelaus.
When Antiochus returned from Egypt in 167 he took Jerusalem by storm and enforced its Hellenization.
Judas refused a partial amnesty, conquered Judaea with the exception of the Acra in Jerusalem, and in December 164 was able to tear down the altar of Zeus and reconsecrate the Temple.
Yoram Tsafrir (30 January 1938 – 23 November 2015) was an Israeli archaeologist.
[1] He was Professor Emeritus in the University of Hebrew University of Jerusalem, in the Institute of Archaeology, and a member of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
A graduate of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1976, he became senior lecturer there in 1978, professor in 1987, and professor emeritus in 2006.
[2] He died on 23 November 2015 at a hospital in Jerusalem.
[6] He has worked on numerous monuments, including Acra Fortress and Nea Ekklesia of the Theotokos.
From 1974, he superintended the Holyland Model of Jerusalem.
Model of Jerusalem
A scale model of Jerusalem giving a vivid view of the city as it existed before it was destroyed by Romans in 70 AD, was prepared by the archaeologists associated with the study of the city's ancient culture.
The project was sponsored in 1964 by the Holy Land Hotel of Jerusalem.
The model was made with authentic material such as stone and marble[dubious – discuss] from Jerusalem itself, embellished with colorful small ceramic tiles and goldleaf fixed to the temple and palaces.
c.140 BCE: The Acra is captured and later destroyed by Simon Thassi
Simon Thassi travels to Rome, where the Roman Republic formally acknowledges the Hasmonean Kingdom.
110 BCE: John Hyrcanus carries out the first military conquests of the independent Hasmonean kingdom, raising a mercenary army to capture Madaba and Schechem, significantly increasing the regional influence of Jerusalem[13][14]
c.87 BCE: According to Josephus, following a six-year civil war involving Seleucid king Demetrius III Eucaerus, Hasmonean ruler Alexander Jannaeus crucified 800 Jewish rebels in Jerusalem
During the war, Armenian King Tigranes the Great takes control of Syria and prepares to invade Judea and Jerusalem but has to retreat following an invasion of Armenia by Lucullus.
[15] However, this period is believed to have resulted in the first settlement of Armenians in Jerusalem.
[16] According to Armenian historian Movses Khorenatsi writing in c.482 CE, Tigranes captured Jerusalem and deported Hyrcanus to Armenia, however most scholars deem this account to be incorrect.
A fascinating, recent discovery appears to have solved one of Jerusalem’s biggest historical mysteries: the location of the Acra, the fortified compound in Jerusalem built by Antiochus Epiphanes, ruler of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire, following his sack of the city in 168 BCE.
Archaeologists in Jerusalem may have just solved one of the city's greatest geographical mysteries.
Excavators recently unearthed what they think are the ruins of the Acra, a fortress constructed more than 2,000 years ago by the Greek ruler Antiochus IV Epiphanes (215-164 B.C.).
At one time mercenary soldiers and Hellenized Jews controlled the ancient fortress, enforcing a brutal rule over Jerusalem's residents.
The Acra's existence is recorded in historical documents, but archaeologists and historians have debated its location.
Flavius Josephus, in his "Antiquities of the Jews" 12:252–253, wrote, "… and when he had overthrown the city walls, he built a citadel [Greek: Acra] in the lower part of the city, for the place was high and overlooked the temple, on which account he fortified it with high walls and towers, and put into it a garrison of Macedonians."
Even so, experts argued that Flavius' interpretation of the City of David may not be the modern City of David, which is considered the Eastern hill in Jerusalem where the Temple Mount sits.
(Jerusalem's Western hill is the larger of the city's two main hills.)
In recent months, excavators working at the City of David archaeological site in Jerusalem Walls National Park uncovered a huge section of wall, as well as a 65-foot-tall (20 meters) tower.
Known as a glacis, the embankment was designed to keep attackers away from the base of the Acra.
Lead slingshots, bronze arrowheads and ballista stones — all stamped with a trident, the symbol of Antiochus Epiphanes' reign — were dug up next to the massive wall.
These small artifacts tell the story of the animosity between ancient Jerusalem's Jewish residents and the Greek-controlled citadel.
The archaeologists involved in the excavation, including Doron Ben-Ami of the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA), invited other archaeologists to visit the site and offer their comments.
"We were very interested in their opinions, and once we had everything presented in front of all our colleagues and experts and we had many conversations," they felt confident in presenting their discovery to the public, Ben-Ami said.
The Acra was built specifically to control access to the Temple Mount, a Jewish holy site, said Ben-Ami, Yana Tchekhanovets and Salome Cohen, excavation directors with the IAA.
Coins found within the Acra's unearthed wall show that the citadel remained intact from the reign of Antiochus IV Epiphanes until the reign of Antiochus VII (139-129 B.C.).
But the mercenaries and the Hellenized Jews who resided in the Acra were defeated in 141 B.C., after a prolonged siege, which left the Greek garrison without access to food.
Simon Maccabeus, one of the brothers in the Hasmonean family who led the Maccabean revolt against the Greeks, spearheaded this celebrated siege.
The discovery of the Acra is "a dream come true" for archaeologists, who have been speculating on the citadel's location for 100 years, the IAA said.
Not only have they found the elusive fortress, but the discovery also reveals what Jerusalem was like before the Hasmoneans took over after the revolt.
"Because we have located the Acra on the City of David, the implication is that the city was not larger than the City of David, and the Acra dominated the entire city, the entire Eastern hill," Ben-Ami said.
The Acra was the Seleucid stronghold built in 186 BC against the south wall of Solomon’s Temple Mount on the Ophel.
At that time the Acra was torn down, and
3:1) puts it in Jerusalem.
Whether or not we can relate Mount Moriah to Jerusalem, there were additional reasons to build the temple here.
For during the city's first eight centuries, the Jerusalemites lived on this hill alone - albeit farther down, on the narrower spur to the south, near the spring.
For the name "Jerusalem" means not "city of peace," as popular etymology has it, but a place "founded by Salem," the Canaanite god of the setting sun.
Keel proposes that, under Egyptian influence, the pre-Davidic Jerusalemites had an open-air sanctuary to the sun-god here; he also holds that the easterly orientation of Solomon's temple perpetuated this tradition.
Indeed, David must have established an accord with Jerusalem's earlier inhabitants, the Jebusites, for he goes "up" and buys the threshing floor of Arauna the Jebusite, erecting a sacrificial altar there ( 2 Samuel 24: 24 - 25).
It was archaeologist Benjamin Mazar, Ritmeyer's mentor, who first noticed something peculiar about this step: its stones are much larger than those in the steps above it.
South of this bend, in the lower parts, is masonry usually identified as Hasmonean, although Yoram Tsafrir suggests that it belonged to the wall of the Seleucid Acra.
From the bend we go west, keeping parallel to the northern line and staying ever so slightly north of the E-shaped cistern (which Ritmeyer suggests belonged to the Acra).
We might attempt to justify this method as follows: Between the first temple, destroyed in 586 BC, and the second, commenced in 520, there were always Jerusalemites living here who could point to the site.
After the return from the Babylonian exile, Jerusalem had no king - hence no need for a palace.
Here in 1976 archaeologists Benjamin Mazar and Meir Ben Dov found part of a public building, pictured here, containing vessels that had been charred in the destruction of 586 BC.
First, yes, the silence is deafening, but in a mountain city like Jerusalem - to quote the adage - "Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence."
Researchers with the Israel Antiquities Authority believe they have found the remains of the stronghold - the Acra - which the Greeks used to control the Temple more than 2,000 years ago - and evidence of the Hasmonean attempts to conquer the stronghold.
Remains of the citadel and tower uncovered in Jerusalem
A fascinating discovery recently uncovered in archaeological excavations the Israel Antiquities Authority is conducting in the Givati ??
parking lot at the City of David, in the Jerusalem Walls National Park, has apparently led to solving one of Jerusalem's greatest archaeological mysteries: the question of the location of the Greek (Seleucid) Acra - the famous stronghold built by Antiochus IV in order to control Jerusalem and monitor activity in the Temple which was eventually liberated by the Hasmoneans from Greek rule.
The Givati excavation continues to uncover numerous artifacts from more than ten different ancient cultures from Jerusalem's history.
Over the past 100 years of archaeological research in Jerusalem numerous theories have been put forth identifying the location of the Acra, The uncertainty stemmed from the paucity of architectural remains that can be traced to the Greek presence in Jerusalem.
Both the Book of Maccabees, as well as the historian Josephus Flavius, locate the Acra within the City of David.
"And they built the city of David with a great and strong wall, and with strong towers, and made it a fortress [Greek: Acra] for them: And they placed there a sinful nation, wicked men, and they fortified themselves therein."
"....and when he had overthrown the city walls, he built a citadel [Greek: Acra] in the lower part of the city, for the place was high, and overlooked the temple; on which account he fortified it with high walls and towers, and put into it a garrison of Macedonians."
In recent months, excavators believe that they have exposed evidence of the Acra citadel on the City of David hill: a section of a massive wall, a base of a tower of impressive dimensions (width c. 4 m, length c. 20 m) and a glacis.
Lead sling shots, bronze arrowheads and ballista stones that were discovered at the site and stamped with a trident, which symbolized the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, are the silent remains of battles that were waged there at the time of the Hasmoneans, in their attempt to conquer the citadel which was viewed as a ‘thorn in the flesh' of the city.
Historical sources state the stronghold was occupied by mercenaries and Hellenized Jews and tell of the suffering Jerusalem's residents were exposed to at the hands of the Acra's inhabitants.
The fortification's mighty defenses withstood all attempts at conquering it, and it was only in 141 BCE, after a prolonged siege and the starvation of the Greek garrison within the Acra that Simon Maccabee was able to force its surrender.
According to archaeologists, Dr. Doron Ben-Ami, Yana Tchekhanovets and Salome Cohen, excavation directors on behalf of the Israel Antiquities Authority, "This sensational discovery allows us for the first time to reconstruct the layout of the settlement in the city, on the eve of the Maccabean uprising in 167 BCE.
The numerous coins ranging in date from the reign of Antiochus IV to that of Antiochus VII and the large number of wine jars (amphorae) that were imported from the Aegean region to Jerusalem, which were discovered at the site, provide evidence of the citadel's chronology, as well as the non-Jewish identity of its inhabitants."
