Tiflis bank robbery

Weeks later a group of Bolsheviks made off with 341,000 rubles (over 2 million quid in today’s money) in the Tiflis Bank Robbery in Georgia.
I think spicynuts calls Stalin a bank robber because he organized the Tiflis bank robbery.
He caused the death of thousands and organized a bank robbery and had lots of sex with lots of women.
Known as the 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, this heist was organized by a group of Bolsheviks that included Vladimir Lenin and Joesph Stalin.
These revolutionaries supported using robbery and other militant activities as a means to their end, and they stole approximately 341,000 rubles ($3.4 million in today's terms) from a bank stagecoach in Tiflis -- now the capital of Georgia -- as funds to purchase more weaponry.
Alongside their political activities, RSDLP and other revolutionary groups (such as anarchists and Socialist Revolutionaries) practiced a range of militant operations, including "expropriations", a euphemism for armed robberies of government or private funds to support revolutionary activities.
In 1906, he was elected to the Presidium of the RSDLP; and shuttled between Finland and Russia, but resumed his exile in December 1907, after the Tsarist defeat of the revolution and after the scandal of the 1907 Tiflis bank robbery.
The 1907 Tiflis bank robbery was an armed robbery by Bolshevik revolutionaries of a bank cash shipment in the Georgian city of Tiflis.
The bank stagecoach was attacked while transporting money between the Post Office and the Tiflis branch of the State Bank of the Russian Empire.
The robbers attacked the bank stagecoach and the surrounding security forces using bombs and guns in the crowded city square resulting in the deaths of forty people and the injuring of fifty others.
The robbers escaped the attack with 341,000 rubles (estimated as US $3.4 million in 2008) from the robbery.
The robbery was planned and/or executed by many high-level Bolsheviks (including Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin) to fund their revolutionary activities.
To achieve this, Lenin argued, the Bolsheviks' immediate task was to campaign diligently among the Russian people to persuade them of the need for Soviet power:
The Bolsheviks tried to provide leadership to the demonstrations.
The military attacked the peaceful demonstration and engaged in repression against the Bolsheviks.
It took place with an armed insurrection in Petrograd and overthrew the Russian Provisional Government and gave the power to the local soviets dominated by Bolsheviks.
Nicholas II, his wife, his son, his four daughters, the family's medical doctor, the Tsar's valet, the Empress' lady-in-waiting, and the family's cook were killed in the same room by the Bolsheviks on the night of July 16/17, 1918.
The six-year long White–Red civil war, the war communism, the famine of 1921 (which killed an estimated 5 million), and foreign military intervention reduced much of Russia to ruin, and provoked rebellion against the Bolsheviks, the greatest being the Tambov rebellion (1919–21).
An audacious and bloody robbery, involving Joseph Stalin, took place in Tiflis (old name for Tbilisi) in 1907.
Organized by the Bolsheviks, it netted the equivalent of 4 million US dollars in today’s money.
In April 1907 leading Bolsheviks, including Lenin and Stalin, met in Berlin to discuss a robbery to obtain funds for their revolutionary activities.
It was decided that Stalin, who lived in the city of Tiflis in Georgia at the time, and an Armenian known as Kamo, should organize a bank robbery in Tiflis.
A worker at the Tiflis banking mail office, who was sympathetic to the Bolshevik cause, informed Stalin that a large shipment of money would be transferred to the Tiflis branch of the State Bank on 26 June 1907.
On the day of the robbery, the robbers, including Stalin and Kamo, met at Yerevan Square (present day Freedom Square) to wait for and ambush the stagecoach carrying the money.
the stagecoach entered the square and was attacked with grenades and bombs thrown by the robbers.
The money was snatched from the stagecoach and the robbers quickly scattered.
The State Bank was not sure how much had been stolen but the best estimates were around 341,000 rubles, worth around 4 million US dollars today.
Around forty people were killed during the robbery and many injured.
The audacious and violent robbery made headlines throughout the world: “Rain of Bombs: Revolutionaries Hurl Destruction among Large Crowds of People” in the London Daily Mirror, “Tiflis Bomb Outrage” in The Times of London, “Catastrophe!”
Despite the success of the robbery and the large sum involved, the Bolsheviks could not use most of the large denomination bank notes because their serial numbers were known to the police.
Wednesday, 26 June 1907
Which were the important events of Wednesday, 26 June 1907 ?
Bolsheviks overthrows transport in Tiflis
The 1907 Tiflis bank robbery took place in Yerevan Square, now Freedom Square, Tbilisi.
The teenage student of the priesthood, then known as Josef "Soso" Djugashvili, was a cobbler's son from a notoriously violent provincial town who had overcome paternal beatings, street fights, several almost fatal accidents and illnesses to enter the Tiflis seminary, one of the finest educational establishments south of Moscow.
By 1907, he was looking to pull off a spectacular bank robbery, but he needed an "inside man".
In the streets of Tiflis, he bumped into an old schoolfriend, now working as an accountant in the state bank, who declared himself a passionate fan of Soselo's poems, particularly the one dedicated to Eristavi.
Stalin charmed and cultivated this admirer until he agreed to reveal the arrival by stagecoach of a million roubles.
Using this information, Stalin set up the Tiflis bank robbery in which 40 people were killed and a huge sum stolen for Lenin.
Only in Georgia, where poetry was read passionately, would a banker risk his life and career to arrange a bloody bank robbery because he loved a man's poetry.
Tiflis Stagecoach Robbery - Starring Joseph Stalin?
In the early days of Russia’s Bolshevik Revolution, bandits like Joseph Stalin paid for their activities through an old-fashioned form of fundraising: bank robbery.
Stalin’s involvement in the 1907 Tiflis robbery, other than planning it, is disputed, and different stories have him doing everything from personally throwing bombs at police to calmly standing off to the side smoking his pipe.
What’s not in dispute is that a group of Bolsheviks attacked a stagecoach carrying over 300,000 rubles (now valued at over $3 million) to the Tiflis branch of the State Bank of the Russian Empire.
Joseph did well in school, and his efforts gained him a scholarship to Tiflis Theological Seminary in 1894.
Joseph chose not to return home, but stayed in Tiflis, devoting his time to the revolutionary movement.
For a time, he found work as a tutor and later as a clerk at the Tiflis Observatory.
Stalin gained infamy being associated with the 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, which resulted in several deaths and 250,000 rubles stolen (approximately $3.4 million in U.S. dollars).
By October, the revolution was complete and the Bolsheviks were in control.
Chapters: People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country), Thieves in law, War crimes in Georgia (country), 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in Abkhazia, Kengir uprising, Sandro Girgvliani Murder Case, Thief in law, Ilia Chavchavadze, Russian Mafia, Sukhumi massacre, Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in South Ossetia, Vyacheslav Ivankov, Ahmed Djemal, Chechen mafia, Dagny Juel, Russian Bratva Structure, Human trafficking in Georgia, Kyrion II, Kamani massacre, Tariel Oniani, Guram Sharadze, William Horwood Stuart, Zakan Jugelia, Aslan Usoyan, Fenya, The Mark of Cain, Bitch Wars, Oleg Khinsagov, Garri Aiba, Evsei Agron, Otari Kvantrishvili, Giorgi Sanaia, Algeti Wolves, Zakhar Kalashov, Vladimir Podatev.
Excerpt: The 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, also known as the Yerevan Square expropriation, was an armed robbery by Bolshevik revolutionaries of a bank cash shipment in the Georgian city of Tiflis (now Georgia's capital, Tbilisi).
The robbery occurred on 26 June 1907 in Yerevan Square (now Freedom Square).
The bank stagecoach was attacked while transporting money between the Post Office and the Tiflis branch of the State Bank of the Russian Empire.
The robbers attacked the bank stagecoach and surrounding security forces using bombs and guns in the crowded city square resulting in the deaths of forty people and the injuring of fifty others, according to official archive documents.
The robbers escaped the attack with 341,000 rubles (estimated as US $3.4 million in 2008) from the robbery.
The robbery was planned and/or executed by many high-level Bolsheviks, including Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Maxim Litvinov, Leonid Krasin, Alexander Bogdanov, and Kamo, to fund their revolutionary activities.
Most notably, Koba (whose nom de guerre came from a Russian story about bandits) was the main planner of the famous stagecoach holdup in downtown Tiflis on June 26, 1907, which netted the Bolsheviks the equivalent of $3.4 million in today’s dollars.
No one knows whether he took part in the actual execution of the attack, in which his team lobbed grenades at the bank stagecoach and its mounted escort from on top of a nearby building, then opened fire on the guards, killing up to 40 guards and civilians as well as a number of horses, according to contemporary reports.
Stalin’s revolutionary comrade Simon Ter-Petrossian, a.k.a. Kamo, seems to have taken most of the risks and done most of the actual fighting in the Tiflis job (including a grievous bomb-making injury, suffered beforehand, which left him confined to bed for a month) while Stalin calmly smoked a cigarette, according to a police report.
In typical fashion, Lenin tried to distance himself from the Tiflis job when the Bolsheviks started getting bad press.
Kamo died in a suspicious motorcycle accident in 1922, leading some to speculate Stalin also had him rubbed out because of his role in the bank robbery.
