Blackwater fire of 1937

The Ten Standard Firefighting Orders are a set of systematically organized rules designed by a USDA Forest Service task force to reduce danger to personnel and increase fire fighting efficiency.
The orders were developed from lessons learned in a number of major wildland fires that led to the deaths of trapped firefighters including the Shoshone National Forest Blackwater fire of 1937 and the Helena National Forest Mann Gulch Fire in 1949.
Ten Standard Firefighting Orders
Melvin Demoski of Nulato holds the Advanced Wildland Firefighting Academy record for reciting the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders in 21 seconds.
Additionally, the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders, a standardized set of wildland firefighting principles, were developed in 1957.
Two training protocols—"Ten Standard Firefighting Orders" and "Eighteen Situations That Shout Watch Out"—were incorporated
Aug. 21, 1937: Fifteen firefighters were killed while fighting the Blackwater Fire in Wyoming's Shoshone National Forest.
The Blackwater fire took place on August 18, 1937 at the Shoshone National Forest, due to a lightning strike approximately 35 miles west of Cody, Wyoming.
The Blackwater fire was caused by a lightning strike on August 18, 1937,
in Shoshone National Forest, about 35 miles (56 km) west of Cody,
The fire quickly spread into dense forest, trapping
The Blackwater fire of 1937 was a forest fire that occurred when a lightning strike ignited a tree in the Shoshone National Forest.
The Blackwater fire started on August 18, 1937, as the result of lightning; it was detected from the Pahaska Tepee at East Yellowstone Entrance at 1535 hours on Friday, August 20, and passed on to District Ranger Charles Fifield at the Wapiti Ranger Station.
Ranger Alfred G. Clayton, of the South Fork District of the Shoshone National Forest, had arrived at the fire camp at about noon.
On August 21, 1937, the tragic Blackwater Fire caused the death of 15 firefighters, burning approximately 1,700 acres of Shoshone National Forest land, near Cody, Wyoming.
Preliminary reports on this lightning fire showed that initial action was vigorous; quite remarkably so, considering the remote location of the fire and that the Shoshone National Forest was considered a low-danger forest.
Rick Connell - U.S. Forest Service - Shoshone National Forest
Chris Schow - U.S. Forest Service - Shoshone National Forest
The fire started on August 18, 1937, as the result of a passing lightning storm during the late afternoon.
On Aug. 21, 1937, fire killed 15 firefighters and injured 38 others in Shoshone National Forest, near Cody, Wyoming - a tragedy known as the "Blackwater Fire."
Blackwater Creek originates on the north slope of Sheep Mesa at an altitude of 11,400 feet in Shoshone National Forest and flows north through Blackwater Canyon.
The Blackwater fire was started by a lightning strike on August 18, 1937, but it remained undetected until early August 20, at which time it was estimated to be about 2 acres in size.
By the evening, it had expanded to 200 acres, and 65 firefighters from the United States Forest Service, which included CCC company 1852 from the Wapiti Ranger District of Shoshone National Forest and employees of the Bureau of Public Roads, were constructing fire lines along two flanks of the fire.
Fire officials believed they needed more manpower, so CCC crews from Bighorn National Forest, 165 mi to the east, and other districts of Shoshone National Forest started responding by the morning of August 21.
The fire consumed 1,700 acres but was not fully controlled until August 24.
On August 18, 1937, a lightning strike started the Blackwater fire in Shoshone National Forest, approximately 35 miles west of Cody, Wyoming, United States.
The fire quickly spread into dense forest, creating spot fires that trapped some of the firefighters in a firestorm.
Nine firefighters died during the fire and six more died shortly thereafter from severe burns and respiratory complications and another 38 firefighters were injured.
The Blackwater fire consumed 1,700 acres of old-growth forest dominated by Douglas fir trees on the west slopes of Clayton Mountain.
Though most of the firefighters consisted of Civilian Conservation Corps employees, they were led by more experienced United States Forest Service fire managers.
Additionally, the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders, a standardized set of wildland firefighting principles, were developed in 1957.
On August 21, 1937, the tragic Blackwater Fire caused the death of 15 firefighters, injury of 38 others, and burned approximately 1,700 acres of National Forest System lands on the Shoshone National Forest, near Cody, Wyoming.
Blackwater Fire, Shoshone National Forest, 1937
Wyo- Aug. 24 -- Superviser John Seiker, of the Shoshone National Forest, said today lightning, striking a remote pine filled canyon, "unmistakably" caused the savage forest blaze that took the lives of 14 firefighters.
(This was the first trial staff hike with a local Shoshone National Forest Crew.)
Text: Shoshone National Forest
What came to be called the Blackwater fire started with a lighting strike in the Shoshone National Forest some time on Wednesday, August 18, 1937.
He would later die of his injuries in a hospital in Cody, Wyoming.
“A Folk Biography of an United States Forest Service Ranger, Westerner, and Artist: A.G. Clayton.”
The Blackwater fire of 1937 was a forest fire started by a lightning strike on August 18, 1937, in Shoshone National Forest, approximately 35 miles (56 km) west of Cody, Wyoming.
Nine firefighters died during the fire and six more died shortly thereafter of severe burns and respiratory complications, while another 38 firefighters were injured.
Additionally, the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders, a standardized set of wildland firefighting principles, were developed twenty years later to help firefighters in the field better understand fire behavior.
The Ten Standard Firefighting Orders were developed by a Task Force commissioned by Forest Service Chief Richard E. McArdle in 1957.
Yes, both the Blackwater Fire of 1937 on the Shoshone National Forest and the Mann Gulch Fire at the Gates of the Mountains in 1949 contributed to the wisdom contained in the Ten Orders.
