1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt

Nguyễn Chánh Thi (23 February 1923 – 23 June 2007) was an officer in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN).
In 1960, Thi led a revolt against Diệm after lobbying by his Airborne Division deputy commander, Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông.
It sprang and fed upon the feelings of political frustration and repression Diem's autocratic rule had engendered.
Lieutenant Colonel Nguyen Trieu Hong, the director of training at the Joint General Staff School; and 3.
Huynh Van Lang, Head of the Office of Exchange and Head of the Can Lao Party Finance Bureau, Republic of Vietnam
Nguyen Van Buu, Can Lao Party’s Financial Adviser
Pham Van Nhu, President of National Assembly and Head of Administrative Bureau of Can Lao Party, Republic of Vietnam
This despatch is an attempt to describe the Can Lao Party of Viet-Nam (also referred to in earlier reports as the Parti Travaillist or Worker’s Party) which is the small semi-covert official party run by President Ngo dinh Diem and his brothers, Nhu and Can.
Personalism may be a sound, if unoriginal, beginning for an anti-communist philosophy, but it has not been developed sufficiently to offer much appeal to the average Vietnamese worker or to the Can Lao Party member.
Probably the most important sub-group under Nhu is the one run by Dr. Tuyen, the head of SEPES, the national intelligence and counterespionage service which can, at Nhu’s direction, conduct clandestine political and propaganda activities for the Can Lao Party.
[Here follows Section A, a 3 1/2-page discussion on the ideology of Personalism, the official dogma of the Can Lao Party.
It is reliably understood that in late 1957 Nhu authorized Tran van Trai (see p. 1316 ) to manage the exploitation of the extensive phosphate deposits on the Paracel Islands (16° 30’–114° E), with the profits to go to the NRM (Can Lao Party front).
Nov 11 – A failed coup attempt by the ARVN (Army of the Republic of Vietnam) keeps President Ngo Dinh Diem in power.
The Can Lao Party played a key role in Ngô Đình Diệm's regime.
According to the decree 116/BNV/CT of Republic of Vietnam, the Can Lao Party was established on 2 September 1954.
On 11 November 1960, "a failed coup attempt against President Ngô Đình Diệm of South Vietnam was led by Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông and Colonel Nguyễn Chánh Thi of the Airborne Division of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN)".
