Far Eastern Party

He was the father of Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis, an explorer who was lost down a crevasse during the 1911–14 Australasian Antarctic Expedition.
Ninnis was the father of Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis, a Lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers and Antarctic explorer.
B. E. S. Ninnis accompanied the 1911–14 Australasian Antarctic Expedition, under Douglas Mawson, as a dog handler.
Along with Mawson and Xavier Mertz, he formed the Far Eastern Party, using sledge dogs to explore the area around the expedition's base in Adelie Land.
Xavier Mertz (1882 – 1913)
Xavier Mertz was a Swiss explorer from Basel.
He took part in the Far Eastern Party, a 1912–13 sledging journey of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE), which claimed his life.
In early 1911, Mertz was hired by geologist and explorer Douglas Mawson.
Mawson had served as physicist during Ernest Shackleton's 1908–09 Nimrod Expedition and was planning his own Australasian Antarctic Expedition.
She stopped briefly at Macquarie Island, where a wireless relay base was established, and reached the site of the expedition's main base at Cape Denison in Adélie Land, on the Antarctic continent, in early January.
Mertz and Ninnis were selected for Mawson’s ambitious Far Eastern journey, which would use the dogs to push quickly to the east of the expedition's base in Commonwealth Bay, towards Victoria Land.
The first glacier the Far Eastern Party crossed on the outward journey—previously unnamed—was named by Mawson after Mertz, becoming the Mertz Glacier.
Far Eastern Party: Background
The main base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition was established in January 1912 at Cape Denison in Commonwealth Bay, Adélie Land.
This was much farther west than expedition commander Douglas Mawson had originally intended; dense pack ice had prevented the expedition ship SY Aurora from landing closer to Cape Adare, his original eastern limit.
The final party, led by Mawson, would push rapidly inland to the south of the Coastal Party towards Victoria Land, an area he had explored during Ernest Shackleton's British Antarctic Expedition in 1908–09.
Assisting him on this Far Eastern Party would be Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis, a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, and the Swiss ski expert Xavier Mertz.
They were in charge of the expedition's sledge dogs—Greenland Huskies—who would be crucial if the party was to cover the distance at the speed Mawson intended.
Far Eastern Party: Journey eastwards
Far Eastern Party: Return
The last photograph taken of the Far Eastern Party, by Archibald Lang McLean of the Eastern Coastal Party, after the parties separated on 17 November 1912 The Far Eastern Party was a sledging component of the 1911–14 Australasian Antarctic Expedition, which investigated the previously unexplored coastal regions of Antarctica west of Cape Adare.
Led by expedition commander Douglas Mawson, the party aimed to explore the area far to the east of their main base in Adélie Land, pushing about 500 miles towards Victoria Land.
Accompanying Mawson were Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis, a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, and the Swiss ski expert Xavier Mertz; the party used sledge dogs to increase their speed across the ice.
Their supplies now severely compromised, Mawson and Mertz turned back west, gradually using the remaining sledge dogs to supplement their scarce rations.
In 1909, Douglas Mawson was 27 years old and already an Antarctic veteran.
In late 1911, the Australasian Antarctic Expedition headed south from the Tasmanian city of Hobart on board the steamship, the S.Y. Aurora.
Mawson was to lead a three-man team called the Far Eastern Party, which aimed to journey over the Antarctic Plateau toward Scott’s base of operations, linking the two regions.
Accompanying Mawson was Xavier Mertz, a Swiss champion ski runner, and Belgrave Ninnis, a young British Royal Fusilier officer.
Far Eastern Party - Background
The Australasian Antarctic Expedition, commanded by Douglas Mawson, explored part of East Antarctica between 1911 and 1914.
The expedition's main base was established in January 1912 at Cape Denison in Commonwealth Bay, Adélie Land.
This was much farther west than originally intended; dense pack ice had prevented the expedition ship SY Aurora from landing closer to Cape Adare, the original eastern limit.
The final party, led by Mawson, would push rapidly inland to the south of the Coastal Party towards Victoria Land, an area he had explored during Ernest Shackleton's British Antarctic Expedition in 1908–09.
Assisting him on this Far Eastern Party would be Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis, a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, and the Swiss ski expert Xavier Mertz.
They were in charge of the expedition's sledge dogs—Greenland Huskies—who would be crucial if the party was to cover the distance at the speed Mawson intended.
Subject: 	Far Eastern Party, Nimrod Expedition, List of Antarctic expeditions, Roald Amundsen, SY Aurora
Sir Douglas Mawson OBE FRS[1] FAA (5 May 1882 – 14 October 1958) was an Australian geologist, Antarctic explorer and academic.
4 Australasian Antarctic Expedition
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
"The Call of Aurora" investigates the relationship between Douglas Mawson and his wireless operator, Sidney Jeffryes, who developed symptoms of paranoia and had to be relieved of his duties.
Sir Douglas Mawson was buried at the historic (estab 1854) cemetery of Saint Jude's Anglican Church, 444 Brighton Road, Brighton, South Australia, in 1958.
On a brutal Antarctic day in January 1913, without food, dogs, transport or companionship, starving, covered in open sores and with the soles of his feet attached to his body with only tape, 30-year-old Australian geologist and explorer Douglas Mawson’s only remaining motivation for soldiering on was to leave his diary in a place where searchers might eventually find it.
As the leader of Australasian Antarctic Expedition, Mawson and his 31-man crew landed on January 8, 1912 at a place they named Cape Denison on Commonwealth Bay, a site later found to be the windiest sea-level place on Earth, with the average wind speeds ringing in at a whopping 50 mph (80 km/h).
Splitting into eight 3-man teams (with the remaining crew staying behind to tend the camps), Mawson’s Far Eastern Party included a Swiss skiing champion, 29-year old Xavier Mertz, and a member of the British Royal Fusiliers, 25-year old Belgrave Ninnis.
Today, Friday 14 December 2012, marks 100 years since the death of Douglas Mawson’s sledging companion, Lieutenant Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis.
Ninnis was a Lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, an infantry regiment in the British Army, before he joined Mawson’s 1911–1914 Australasian Antarctic Expedition as a minder of the 49 Greenland huskies that would be used for sledging in Antarctica.
Ninnis was part of the three-man sledging team, the ‘Far Eastern Party’, with Douglas Mawson and Xavier Mertz, who headed east on 10 November 1912 to survey King George V Land.
This lantern slide taken by photographer Frank Hurley shows the cut-down sledge used by the explorer Sir Douglas Mawson and his Far Eastern sledging party, during the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of 1912 to 1913.
Mawson had planned for three separate sledging parties to head out from Cape Denison, with himself leading the Far Eastern Party, who were to journey over the plateau to Victoria Land to connect Cape Denison to the western discoveries of Borchgrevink, Shackleton and Scott.
On 10 November 1912, Mawson accompanied by Xavier Mertz, a 28-year-old Swiss lawyer and ski champion, and Lieutenant Belgrave Ninnis, a 22-year-old British Army officer headed east, to survey King George IV Land.
Sir Douglas Mawson: the Journey
'Sir Douglas Mawson was a man of great vision and determination, whose tireless work has provided the world with a legacy of scientific knowledge and great inspiration.'
Sir Douglas Mawson, an Australian geologist, Antarctic explorer and academic was a key expedition leader in the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration along side Roald Amundsen, James Ross, Robert Scott and Ernest Shackleton.
In 1914, he was knighted by King Edward VII and became Sir Douglas Mawson for his contributions and courage during expeditions he had already undertaken.
Sir Douglas Mawson's image appeared on the Australian one hundred dollar note from 1984 - 96.
Mawsons Australasian Antarctic Expedition
Instead, he lead his own expedition, the Australasian Antarctic Expedition.
Mawson wanted to chart the "2000-mile coastline directly south of A ustralia.... The great span between Cape Adare, lying to the south of New Zealand, and Gauss Berg, lying south of the Indian Ocean (which) was virgin land virtually unexplored."
Even Mawson was a part of a three-man sledding team, the Far Eastern Party, including Xavier Mertz and Lieutenant Belgrave Ninnis.
Douglas Mawson.
Douglas Mawson went on four expeditions to Antarctica; his first expedition was part of the Ernest Shackleton British Antarctic Expedition.
This is where Mawson went on the Australasian Antarctic Expedition.
Thirty years old, already a seasoned explorer, Douglas Mawson was the leader of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE), a 31-man team pursuing the most ambitious exploration yet of the southern continent.
For his own Far Eastern Party, he chose 29-year-old Swiss ski champion Xavier Mertz and 25-year-old Belgrave Ninnis, an eager, likeable Englishman serving in the Royal Fusiliers.
What drove him onward was the hope of leaving his diary, along with Mertz’s, in a place where searchers might eventually find them and learn the story of the doomed Far Eastern Party.
