1964 Brinks Hotel bombing

After reading that article I was soon reading more historical websites and found that many familiar photos from the Vietnam War (or the American War as it is known here) took place in Saigon.
General Nguyen Ngoc Loan executing a Viet Cong prisoner – 1968
On February 1st, 1968 during the Tet offensive General Loan shot Viet Cong prisoner, Nguyen Van Lem (also known as Bay Lop) in front of NBC News film cameras and photographer Eddie Adams.
Nguyen Ngoc Loan, 67, Dies; Executed Viet Cong Prisoner
This photo is often assumed to be of Americans evacuating from the US Embassy during the fall of Saigon, which is incorrect.
This photo was taken the day before the fall of Saigon.
As Saigon is modernising at such a rapid pace I wondered if this buidling still existed.
On 30 April 1975 troops from the Vietnamese People’s Army entered the city, marking the fall of Saigon and the end of the war.
Key buildings were quickly occupied, including the Independence Palace, and this picture of a tank crashing through the gates of the Independence Palace came to symbolise the fall of Saigon.
Australian photographer Neil Davis was in Saigon when the city fell, and he had the foresight to go to the Palace to record the inevitable moment when it would be claimed by the north.
This photo was taken on April 29, 1975, the day before the fall of Saigon.
After the fall of Saigon the embassy was abandoned, and it was not until 1995 that the site was handed back to the U.S. government.
While reading up on the history of Saigon I found this photo of US Military Police in a gun battle on Thong Nhut Boulevard (now Le Duan Street) outside the embassy.
Are you still in Saigon?
Hi Konrad, welcome to Saigon!
Saigon is a busy city but we’re loving it :)
I went to Saigon two years ago but didn’t even do half the things that you mentioned on your list…ah well, looks like i’m going to have to pay my friend Ho Chi Minh another visit.
A few years ago when I went back to Saigon, I found the house I lived in for about 2 years.
Hint: it was across the street from the old Golf Club de Saigon, which has since been converted into a public???
If you revisit Saigon, you may wish to visit the site of the Brinks Hotel bombing, a US BOQ (Batchelor Officers Quarters), at 5.45pm Christmas Eve 1964.
The site is now occupied by the Park Hyatt Hotel, 2 Lam Son Square, near the Saigon Opera House.
My wife and I are planning a visit to Saigon early in 2014 and hope that we can meet to discuss iconic photos and places.
I live in Saigon and have tracked down most of the sites you have referenced except the execution pic.
I’m in Saigon now and went through all these in real life today.
This is the photo: http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-paatQIBTHwM/U3Ju_2PNZdI/AAAAAAAAJEs/rk8FC5lhesI/s1600/Saigon+Execution+Murder+of+a+Vietcong+by+Saigon+Police+Chief,+1968+3.jpg
I just left Saigon but I will be back in a few months.
The Brink Hotel in Saigon, also known as the Brink Bachelor Officers Quarters, was bombed by the Viet Cong on the evening of December 24, 1964, during the Vietnam War.
Two Viet Cong operatives detonated a car bomb underneath the hotel, which housed United States Army officers.
The explosion killed two Americans, an officer and an NCO, and injured approximately 60, including military personnel and Vietnamese civilians.
The bombing prompted debate within the administration of United States President Lyndon B. Johnson.
At 5:55 p.m. on December 24, 1964, Viet Cong terrorists exploded a bomb in the garage area underneath the Brinks Hotel in Saigon, South Vietnam.
Small buildings at the rear of the Brinks Hotel were completely destroyed by the force of the blast
General Westmoreland, in March of 1964 Secretary McNamara was in Saigon and South Vietnam barnstorming around with, with General Khanh, what did you think of that?
You wrote that during the McNamara visit to Saigon and Honolulu in June of ’64 thinking in Washington on increasing troop commitments was more advanced than anything you were considering in Saigon.
Politically, Saigon was in a state of dis, disarray.
I, wa...am aware of no messages from Washington to Saigon to the ambassador asking for our advice in that regard.
Now, what about after the Brinks Hotel bombing in Christmas of ’64.
Well, the tit-for-tat program didn’t work because there was so much discussion as to the targets where Washington got involved in a lot of detail that time went by and ah the relationship between the enemy’s action in the south and our retaliatory action was lost.
I had enough troops to take care of any retaliatory action on the ground ah by the Hanoi regime.
And, Mc...Mr. McNamara advised me on that occasion and on innumerable occasions during his visits to Saigon that I should ask for whatever troops, whatever military forces that I thought were needed in order to carry out ah our national objective.
Well, that was just north of ah Saigon.
We’re getting rather close to Saigon in a highly populated area.
And, those B-52’s were an innovation and ah during the course of the Vietnam War and ah it destroyed and disrupted a lot of the enemy actions ah I, I call them spoiling attacks.
What about in June or July of ’65 when he was over in Saigon just before the major troop build up, did you stress then that this was going to be a long haul?
When I returned to, ah, to Saigon, uh, uh, President Thieu thanked me.
I had some, ah...operations planned along the Cambodia border, which I, I cancelled and repositioned the troops along the approaches to Saigon... Ah, as ah...as the...as Tet approached it became very evident that although the enemy had, ah...ah said that they were going to have a cease fire for seven days...and we were under great pressure from ah, Washington politically to have a cease fire ourselves.
M.P. company that we had designated to reinforce anywhere in Saigon, if required.
Well...I felt at the time, and I think subsequent information has confirmed that they honestly thought that if they put on a big offensive, and North Vietnamese troops were moved to the South...and they gained the initiative by surprise attack, that the people of South Vietnam were going to rise up against the, ah...the ah, Thieu regimes the people of South Vietnam would rise up up against the Saigon regime.
Ah, the force was defeated, and the Viet Cong were virtually depleted.
Mr. Johnson, after, ah...ah, Wheeler returned from Saigon, turned the matter over to Mr. Clifford, who was the new Secretary of Defense.
But I was never asked to come to Washington, and nobody came to...ah, Saigon--Mr. Clifford or his representative to discuss it with me following the visit by General Wheeler.
I have worked as a Concierge ever since starting at Park Hyatt Saigon several years ago and love the challenges the job presents.
Saigon is my city and my home and a vibrant one at that.
Just a stone’s throw from the hotel is Saigon’s Central Post Office; the largest post office in Vietnam and one of my favorite buildings.
Nearby the post office is the famous central Saigon Cathedral This architectural marvel was built in 1877 amazingly entirely out of imported material, the bricks were brought in by boat from Marseille.
A hearty bowl of Phở is one of my favorites and with VND 100,000 I would eat a bowl of Phở thập cẩm (with everything) at Phở Hòa in Pasteur street; One of the most renowned Phở eateries in Saigon.
VND 100,000 is actually quite a lot of money for a bowl of Phở here in Saigon.
One interesting fact which many people are not aware of is that Park Hyatt Saigon sits on the site of the old Brink Hotel.
On the evening of December 24, 1964, during the Vietnam War, two Viet Cong operatives detonated a car bomb in the carpark below the hotel.
The explosion killed two Americans, an officer and an NCO, and injured approximately 60, including military personnel and Vietnamese civilians.
1964 Brink Hotel Bombing in Saigon
During the Vietnam War, a six-story hotel in central Saigon was used to house American officers.
On December 24, 1964, two Vietcong combatants in South Vietnamese Army uniforms drove into Saigon and to the Brink with a 200-lb charge in the trunk of one of their two cars.
Former Marine Corps University professor Mark Moyar, however, in Triumph Forsaken, says instead that "the Viet Cong had been trying to kill comedian Bob Hope, who had just flown in to perform a Christmas show for the troops and was planning to stay at the Brink Hotel."
The path toward the full Americanization of the Vietnam War was a gradual process.
Learn about President Lyndon B. Johnson's initial strategy, his response to North Vietnam and his decision for escalation in this video lesson.
The decision to introduce American combat troops to the Vietnam War in March of 1965 was the result of several months of gradual escalation by President Lyndon B. Johnson.
This resulted in the introduction of combat troops in 1965 and the United States replacing the South Vietnamese as the main fighting force in the Vietnam War.
This was Johnson's attempt at building a coalition effort in the Vietnam War, one that was largely unsuccessful.
On December 24, the NLF bombed the Brinks Hotel in Saigon, which housed American advisors; two were killed.
The year 1965 symbolized Johnson's decision to Americanize the Vietnam War.
My second visit to Saigon was because of illness.
Since the medics at Phu?c Vinh couldn't figure out what was wrong with me, they sent me to the U.S. Navy hospital in Saigon, where the doctors diagnosed my illness as a "fever of unknown etiology" -- meaning they didn't know, either.
Since Tuesday I have been moldering here in the U.S. Navy hospital in Saigon with some exotic tropical disease that seems not (at least in my case) to be any more terrifying than a 48-hour head- and stomach-ache.
Saigon 1964, corner of Tu-Do and Le-Thanh-Ton
On December 24, 1964, we did a very unusual thing and traveled by car from Tân Ba to Saigon, a distance of about thirty kilometers.
We stayed at the Tân Lôc Hotel, which I later described as "the second sorriest hotel in Saigon," though I don't remember exactly what was wrong with it.
This major evidently stayed around in front of the PX a few minutes longer than I did, because he was slightly injured by flying glass when the Brinks Hotel blew up.
The Brinks Hotel was being used as an American officers' billet.
At 5:55 p.m. on December 24, 1964, a truckload of explosives blew up in the garage area underneath the hotel.
Also a number of Vietnamese and Australians were injured, and some small buildings at the rear of the Brinks Hotel were completely destroyed by the force of the blast.
Note from 48 years later: The site of the former Brinks Hotel is now the location of the five-star Park Hyatt Saigon Hotel, which is reputed to be the best and most expensive hotel in Ho Chi Minh City.
On the front lawn of the Park Hyatt there is now a plaque commemorating the car bombing of Christmas Eve 1964 at what was then the Brinks Hotel.
I just took a walk past the Brinks Hotel.
It's easy to tell who is from Saigon and who is from the field -- just watch what they do when something explodes.
Next: Têt in Saigon
While I was in Saigon for Têt I saved this calendar page to show how the Vietnamese keep their solar and lunar calendars straight.
We had a good vacation in Saigon Jan. 31 - Feb 4.
I stayed in the Hotel Dong Khanh in Cholon, the Chinese twin-city of Saigon.
My seventh visit to Saigon was also in March 1965, when I spent one night at the Hotel Saigon after returning from my week in Hong Kong.
I also spent three days in Saigon, before and after Hong Kong.
Hong Kong was a good thing: cool, peaceful, clean -- well, not really clean, but the accumulated filth doesn't fester like it does in Vietnam, nor does Hong Kong have the pervasive smell of swamp- and fart-gas that hangs over Saigon.
Best, in fact only redeeming feature of Saigon these days is the Centre Culturel Français, the only public building in Saigon that is not surrounded by barbed wire; there, in air-conditioned comfort, one can see the only decent films in town, for free; also recitals, lectures, etc.
There is also a Goethe Institute in Saigon (and in Hong Kong, for that matter) and, of course, on the busiest corner of the largest boulevard in the center of town, the USIS library with the big plate-glass show windows.
My fourteenth visit to Saigon was in August 1995.
We arrived in Saigon at 11 o'clock in the morning of Tuesday, August 8, 1995 and immediately took a taxi to the Sinh Café to book a three-day Mekong Delta tour.
We stayed the night at a hotel called the Mini-Hotel Bi Saigon, which was right around the corner from the Sinh Café.
Me at the floating hotel in Saigon (we didn't stay there, just had a look)
Next: Goodbye to Saigon, 1995
Me at the floating hotel in Saigon 2.
Favorite thing: Although the Number One Beer in Vietnam is still Saigon Beer and the second most popular beer is Tiger Beer, San Miguel Beer is growing in Popularity in Vietnam and is battling south east asia's regional beer superpower Tiger Beer in Vietnam (and in other parts of south east asia too like in cambodia, thailand, laos, burma).
Fondest memory: San Miguel beer is available in Saigon
Favorite thing: Tiger Beer, the another South East Asian Beer and Originated in Singapore (and a Direct Competitor of San Miguel Beer for regional beer supremacy) is presently, the number one Beer here in Saigon.
Saigon Beer Comes in a Close Second and San Miguel Beer a nother close third since it is very aggressive at marketing it's brand.
Saigon / Ho Chi Minh City
Favorite thing: Ho Chi Minh City is the official and the modern name of Saigon.
Fondest memory: Saigon / Ho Chi Minh City
The French colonized it and called it Gia Dinh (but later reverted to the people's usage of Saigon).
Saigon
South Vietnam's capital of Saigon was considered fairly safe from Viet Cong insurgents in the early 60's, but on Christmas Eve 1964 two Viet Cong operatives detonated a car bomb underneath the Brink Hotel, which was being used to billet junior American officers in the country in an advisory and support capacity.
The explosion killed two Americans and injured approximately 60 people.
The Brink Hotel, also known as Brink's BOQ (Bachelor Officers' Quarters) was repaired following the bombing, and American officers continued to stay there until the fall of Saigon in April 1975.
(4) A Kaiser M606 with minimal South Vietnamese Army (ARVN) markings threads its way through construction vehicles, somewhere in Saigon.
In the early 1960's, a military coup overthrowing the Saigon government was pretty much an annual event.
Bumper to bumper on Nguyen Hue Boulevard, Saigon, circa 1968.
This dynamic photo, courtesy Lance V. Nix on Flickr, shows that commuters in the provinces didn't necessarily have the same access to automobiles and gasoline as in Saigon.
The U.S. established a presence very early in the war at Camp Holloway, and the Viet Cong attack on this base in early 1965 was one of the key escalating events that brought U.S. combat troops into the conflict.
Saigon
The location is unknown; an airfield is seen in the background, and is possibly Tan Son Nhut Air Base near Saigon.
This cemetery was the site of a significant battle between USAF Security Police and a large Viet Cong force attacking the air base during the Tet Offensive of January 1968 (11), and again in May 1968.
The Brinks Hotel housed some American military officers in Saigon.
The Brinks Hotel incident is important for several reasons.
President Johnson overruled his advisers in this instance, arguing that bombing retaliation for the Brinks Hotel attack would be politically foolish during Christmas and militarily unsound as a disproportionate response which might unnecessarily escalate the war.
The attack on the Brinks Hotel epitomized the situation for Americans in Vietnam in the mid-1960s.
At 25 years of age, this recent graduate of St. Anselm’s College in Manchester, New Hampshire, was the youngest Navy nurse at the Station Hospital Saigon.
She spent much of her time in Saigon working late night shifts in the surgical ward or the intensive care unit.
Even on her days off, Darby devoted precious time hunting down scarce hospital supplies at various Saigon apothecaries, often paying for items with her own money.
Reynolds shared an apartment with three other nurses in the Brink Bachelor Officers Quarters (BOQ)—a drab seven story hotel leased by the Navy to provide housing for American officers in Saigon.
Image of a photograph showing the damage to the Brinks Hotel - in Saigon - following a bomb blast set-off by Viet Cong terrorists in the garage under the hotel.
The event took place on December 24, 1964.
JAMES THOMSON (National Security Council staff): When Lyndon Johnson inherited the presidency, he inherited many things, but one of them was the legacy of the Vietnam War and the Democratic president's felt-need not to lose one square foot of territory to communism, particularly in Asia.
NARRATOR: For the first time, American aircraft bombed North Vietnam.
And he also saw it as one dramatic way in which after weeks and months of seeming indecision, he could convey to Hanoi, to Saigon, and to the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue, that you were not dealing with a softie.
On the eve of the election, the Vietcong attacked an American airbase near Saigon.
AMBASSADOR MAXWELL TAYLOR: I recommended a retaliatory air strike for the bombing of Bienhoa airbase which was occupied largely by American aircraft, and the losses in personnel were all American.
It was something new, and it was an excellent reason to have a retaliatory strike.
NARRATOR: Four days after the Vietcong team blew up the Brink's Hotel, two Vietcong regiments prepared to strike the village of Binh Gia near Saigon.
They inflicted the first of a series of devastating defeats on Saigon's army.
NARRATOR: National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy already favored a greater effort when he arrived in Saigon in early February 1965.
NARRATOR: While McGeorge Bundy was in Saigon, the Vietcong attacked an American outpost at Pleiku, in the Central Highlands.
He hoped to bolster Saigon's morale.
But there was a coup attempt in Saigon on February 19.
The bombing was to begin the next day coordinated with the Saigon government.
It was bombed and repaired, year after year.
NARRATOR: Three weeks after the Marines landed, the Vietcong attacked the American Embassy in Saigon.
How do you resolve that, sir, with your statements in Saigon that their objective is to kill the Vietcong -- to seek them out and kill them?
Saigon lost 800 of its best troops.
Johnson approved the request while McNamara was in Saigon.
