École Polytechnique massacre

Vigils in Halifax, Canada mark 25th anniversary of Montreal Massacre
Hannah Deloughery spent the evening of her 25th birthday on Saturday at a vigil in Halifax marking the 25th anniversary of the Montreal Massacre.
“In under 20 minutes, he murdered 14 women.”
Two university social-work students took to the stage Saturday to announce that they are launching a postcard campaign calling for the federal government to hold an inquiry into the disproportionate number of murdered and missing aboriginal women in Canada.
Similar ceremonies happened around the country, with a large crowd gathering outside Ecole Polytechnique to remember the victims in Montreal.
There was also be a torchlight procession through the Notre-Dame-des-Neiges cemetery in Montreal.
On December 6, 1989, a young man, Marc Lépine, burst into a class at Montréal's École Polytechnique armed with an automatic weapon.
For some, Marc Lépine's action had purely psychological origins: it was an isolated act without social significance.
Survivors recall École Polytechnique shooting
Rifiorati, who was a 24-year-old student at the Université de Montreal’s engineering school, was witnessing the start of what is still Canada’s worst mass shooting ever, an event whose 20th anniversary will be marked in solemn ceremonies across Canada on Sunday.
The slain women have achieved iconic status in Canada.
There had only been three in Canada at that point—one each in Ottawa and Brampton, Ont., in 1975, and another in Winnipeg in 1978.
Rathjen, who went from being an engineering student to a tenacious advocate for the reform of Canada’s gun laws, is rolling up her sleeves again to protect the controversial federal gun registry.
Riopel would like to see one other change as the world moves on 20 years after the Montreal Massacre.
1989 Montreal Massacre was an anti-feminist attack, period.
Women of Canada: you know the 1989 Montreal Massacre, the École Polytechnique shooting that killed 14 women and injured 14 others?
That’s the basic message of Jonathan Kay’s National Post article on the issue, rather uniquely titled, “For the 23rd anniversary of the École Polytechnique massacre, Amish lessons in mourning”.
Gee, might it have something to do with the perpetrator’s own admittance that he was “fighting feminism”, and the fact that he screamed "I hate feminists" before opening fire?
“Twenty-three years ago, on December 6, 1989, Marc Lépine walked into École Polytechnique and shot 28 people, killing 14 of them, and then himself.”
Translation: please stop thinking about why the Montreal Massacre happened—what it meant for all women, and what it still means for women today.
Well, what does Kay want the people of Canada to think about instead?
This attempt to befit Canadian citizens with blinders, to distract them from the important questions pricked by the Montreal Massacre, is what is truly diminishing of the tragedy.Calling our national day of memorial, inspired by the event, a boondoggle—in other words, wasteful and pointless work—is also what is truly diminishing behaviour.
The Massacre of Women at the École Polytechnique: An essay
The text below was written by a dear friend of mine, Elisabeth Harrison for her The History of Feminism in Canada class.
at the École Polytechnique, December 6 1989:
The events of December 6, 1989 at the engineering school of the Université de Montréal, the mass murder of 14 women which was committed by one man, is commonly referred to as the  “Montreal Massacre.”
December 6, 1989 was the second to last day of fall term classes at the École Polytechnique, the engineering school of the Université de Montréal.
[5] The sole male casualty was Marc Lépine, who died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound, having just committed mass femicide.
Sylvie Gagnon, a survivor of the massacre, speaking about her experience in the film After the Montreal Massacre, says, “I heard the shot, I heard the scream.”
In The Montreal Massacre: A Story of Membership Categorization Analysis, Peter Eglin and Stephen Hester write:
The Montreal Massacre provides a particularly perspicuous case of how social phenomena are inseparable from, and in a sense, constituted by, the ways in which they are described and analyzed, that is, made accountable in media reportage and commentary.
[10] Gage writes that while Moore envisions Canada as a gun violence-free utopia, his view is directly contradicted by the December 6 massacre of women – an explicitly misogynous school shooting.
Even the way in which the December 6 mass murder of women is named reveals a resistance to specifying it as an act of misogyny: “The Montreal Massacre” has come to be the most common way to refer to it.
In “Educating the Living, Remembering the Dead: The Montreal Massacre as Metaphor,” Jennifer Scanlon explains her practice of introducing students to the massacre as a metaphor through which the wider problem of violence against women can be understood.
On its website, Status of Women Canada writes:
Did you know that December 6 is the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women in Canada?
Established in 1991 by the Parliament of Canada, this day coincides with the sad anniversary of the death of fourteen young women who were tragically killed on December 6, 1989 at l’École Polytechnique de Montréal because of their gender.
According to the Native Women’s Association of Canada, from 1985 to 2005, approximately 500 First Nations women have “disappeared.”
An immediate response to the massacre was to organise and participate in processions through the streets of Montreal.
Sexism in engineering schools across Canada came under feminist scrutiny for the first time: the École Polytechnique’s annual “Lady Godiva Ride,” wherein a sex worker was hired to ride a horse across campus while naked was no longer seen as harmless fun.
[31] In January of 1990 (less than a month after the massacre of women at the École Polytechnique), at the University of Alberta, Celeste Brosseau, a woman who had spoken out against sexism in her the engineering program was performing onstage at the engineering “skit night,” when the audience began to chant “shoot the bitch!”
The third stream of feminist response to the December 6 massacre of women is to organise for change: For instance, despite its flaws, in marking December 6 as the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, the government of Canada does acknowledge and highlight violence against women as a serious problem.
Feminist analyses of the December 6 massacre of women at the École Polytechnique demonstrate that it must be understood as an instance of misogynous violence, part of the broader problem of male violence against women.
The Montreal Massacre.
Bearing Witness to the Montreal Massacre” in Critical Matrix.
[3]After the Montreal Massacre.
The Montreal Massacre.
[6]After the Montreal Massacre.
“‘You’re All a Bunch of Feminists’: Categorization and the Politics of Terror in the Montreal Massacre” in Human Studies.
The Montreal Massacre.
(Toronto: Penguin Canada, 2005.)
[16]Francine Pelletier in After the Montreal Massacre.
[18]After the Montreal Massacre.
The Montreal Massacre.
“Educating the Living, Remembering the Dead: The Montreal Massacre as Metaphor” in Feminist Teacher.
[25]Status of Women Canada.
[26]Status of Women Canada.
[29]Native Women’s Association of Canada.
The Montreal Massacre.
“The Montreal Massacre,” in CBC Archives.
[35]After the Montreal Massacre.
[41]Native Women’s Association of Canada.
[43]Native Women’s Association of Canada.
Montreal.
Characteristics: Misogynist - Rampage at the University of Montreal
Date of murder: December 6, 1989
Location: Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Marc Lépine: The 25-year-old perpetrator of the École Polytechnique massacre on December 6, 1989.
Armed with a Ruger Mini-14 rifle and a hunting knife, he arrived at École Polytechnique, an engineering school with the Université de Montréal in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, and entered a mechanical engineering classroom with about 60 students, singling out the nine female students and shooting all of them.
After engaging in a gun battle with arriving officers, Kretschmer then shot at numerous people and buildings before committing suicide.
and detonated a SEMTEX bomb using his cell phone, committing suicide and killing ten more students and wounding dozens of others.
École Polytechnique massacre
École Polytechnique Massacre – December 6, 1989
Dawson College shooting – Canada, September 13, 2006
Statement regarding Dr. Janice Raymond speak at the Montreal Massacre Memorial
Every year, since December 6th, 1989 when 14 female engineering students at École Polytechnique were massacred by a man who stated that he "hated feminists", Vancouver Rape Relief has been marking the day to memorialize the women he killed and to strengthen our fight to end male violence against women.
In 2013, by far one of the most prominent debates is Canada's laws surrounding prostitution, which the Supreme Court of Canada is currently deciding.
Her expertise has been instrumental in campaigning to have prostitution recognized as a form of violence against women — a view shared by many equality-seeking women's groups across Canada.
She is an important and highly valued ally in the fight to end the prostitution and trafficking of women and girls worldwide and we are honoured to have her speaking at the Montreal Massacre Memorial.
Monique Lépine, mother of Montreal Massacre shooter, speaks in Whitehorse
'I am the mother of Marc Lépine...and I still have love for him,' she said
The mother of the gunman behind the Montreal Massacre was in Whitehorse Tuesday night to speak publicly about how his actions affected her and how others can heal.
On Dec. 6, 1989, Marc Lépine entered École Polytechnique and murdered 14 young women before turning the gun on himself.
But after a shooting in 2006 at Montreal's Dawson College she finally spoke out in hopes that telling her story could make a difference.
"I am the mother of Marc Lépine," she said.
Day 12: Remembering the École Polytechnique Massacre
Armed with a rifle, a hunting knife and a hatred of feminists, Marc Lépine walked into Montreal’s École Polytechnique on December 6, 1989.
“I am fighting feminism,” he told them.
It’s been 26 years since the École Polytechnique Massacre, a hate crime that shook Canada and the world.
It’s a day when Canadian flags fly at half-mast, candlelight vigils are held across Canada, and we stop to think about those 14 women.
Gender-based violence and harassment remains “pervasive” in Canada, reported a secret Status of Women Canada document that was made public in September.
The report also pointed out that Canada has no comprehensive national strategy to address violence against women, unlike countries including the U.K., Australia, and Ireland.
A recent Globe and Mail investigation found that Indigenous women in Canada are about 7 times more likely than non-Indigenous women to be targeted by serial killers.
So, on December 6, let’s remember the victims of the École Polytechnique massacre, and continue to light the way toward a brighter future for women and girls.
The Montreal Massacre is a national day of remembrance and action, which makes it the perfect time for IBM to push their pinkification of science campaign.
On December 6th, 1989, fourteen women were killed and another ten women and four men injured during the attack at École Polytechnique in Montreal, Quebec by a gunman screaming about feminists.
It wasn’t much—it’s never enough to honour those who paved the way for me to be a woman in science living and working in Canada—but it’s what I could do to celebrate instead of mourn.
But to relaunch this idiocy on the anniversary of the Montreal Massacre after it already flopped in October is to remind every Canadian woman in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics that we’re still a long, long, long way from being treated as equals.
