Ancient Egypt

The Roman province of Egypt (Aegyptus) was established in 30 BC.
Egypt became a Roman province under the reign of Augustus in 30 BC, after his victory over Mark Anthony and Queen Cleopatra.
During the 1st and 2nd century, trading activity in the Roman province flourished.
The Roman province (Ancient Egypt Aegyptus) was a center for Christianity.
The Roman province supported principles like Arianism, Gnosticism, Manichaeism and Monasticism.
-Roman province Aegyptus of Ancient Egypt
The unification of these kingdoms started the true era of ancient Egyptian history, and in this lesson we'll talk about what we know about this, as well as what we don't.
In fact, archaeological evidence suggests that humans had developed settled societies along the Nile River as early as 6,000 BCE.
Prior to the unification of a single Egypt, most Egyptians lived under the rule of one of two distinct kingdoms.
To understand this, it's first important to remember that the Nile River flows from south to north, emptying into the Mediterranean Sea at the Nile Delta.
There are very few surviving records from the Archaic period, the era before the unification of Egypt, so there is actually very little about this that we know for certain.
However, according to most accounts, the unification of the two kingdoms occurred in the early third millennium BCE when the king of Upper Egypt invaded and conquered the kingdom of Lower Egypt.
Archaeologically, some of the evidence of unification comes from the mixing of the traditions of each kingdom.
The Nile River is the heart of Egypt.
• Nile River is 4,000 miles long (the longest river in the world!)
• Nile River flows North from central Africa to the Mediterranean sea.
Egyptians believed Osiris brought civilization to Egypt.
Egyptian pyramids were built primarily during the time of the Old Kingdom (2700 to 2200 BCE) Pyramids were part of large building complexes dedicated to the dead, in effect a city of the dead.
Timeline of Major Periods in Ancient Egypt Years BCE Period Characteristics c. 3150 Unification of Egypt under King   Narmer (Menes) 3100 to 2575 Archaic period Consolidation of the state 2575 to 2180 Old Kingdom Despotic pharaohs build the pyramids and favor conspicuous funerary monuments (pyramids); institutions, economic strategies and artistic traditions of ancient Egypt established.
2180 to 2040 First Intermediate period Political chaos and disunity 2040 to 1640 Middle Kingdom City of Thebes achieves prominence, also the priesthood of Amun 1640 to 1530 Second Intermediate period Hyskos rulers in the delta (invaders) 1530 to 1070 New Kingdom Great imperial period of Egyptian history, with pharaohs buried in the Valley of Kings; pharaohs include Ramses II, Seti I, and Tutankhamen, as well as Akhenaten, the heretic ruler 1070 to 332 Late period Gradual decline of pharaonic authority, culminating in Persian rule (525 to 404 and 343 to 332) 332 to 30 Ptolemaic period The Ptolemies bring Greek influence to Egypt, beginning with the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great in 332 30 BCE Roman Occupation Egypt becomes an imperial province of Romehttp://public.csusm.edu/aitken_html/m330/egypt/
Kings in the Old Kingdom were called Pharaohs.
Pharaohs possessed absolute power – meaning that they had unlimited power in ruling their people.The Old Kingdom was anage of prosperity and Pharaohs had a governmentsplendor.
The Old Kingdom collapsedaround 2180 BCE, and theEgyptians experienced 150years of chaos.
This began the period of Egyptian history known as the Middle Kingdom.
Trade also expanded duringDuring the Middle Kingdom, the Pharaohs this period, as did theused their military to expand Egypt’s Pharaoh’s concern for theborders.
The New Kingdom was established and lasted nearly 500 years.
During the New Kingdom Egypt became the most powerful state in Southwest Asia.
Tutankhamen restored the old religion after Amenhotep died, but considerableIn 1652 BCE, the Middle Kingdom ended when the damage was done.
Because the Nile flooded regularly, Egyptians had a positive outlook and stable daily life.Egypt was dependent on the Nile River.
The Late Period of Ancient Egypt refers to the last flowering of native Egyptian rulers after the Third Intermediate Period and before the Persian conquests.
For almost 30 centuries—from its unification around 3100 B.C. to its conquest by Alexander the Great in 332 B.C.—ancient Egypt was the preeminent civilization in the Mediterranean world.
From the great pyramids of the Old Kingdom through the military conquests of the New Kingdom, Egypt’s majesty has long entranced archaeologists and historians and created a vibrant field of study all its own: Egyptology.
Few written records or artifacts have been found from the Predynastic Period, which encompassed at least 2,000 years of gradual development of the Egyptian civilization.
Around 3400 B.C., two separate kingdoms were established: the Red Land to the north, based in the Nile River Delta and extending along the Nile perhaps to Atfih; and the White Land in the south, stretching from Atfih to Gebel es-Silsila.
King Menes founded the capital of ancient Egypt at White Walls (later known as Memphis), in the north, near the apex of the Nile River delta.
The capital would grow into a great metropolis that dominated Egyptian society during the Old Kingdom period.
The annual flooding of the great Nile River provided the necessary irrigation and fertilization each year; farmers sowed the wheat after the flooding receded and harvested it before the season of high temperatures and drought returned.
The Old Kingdom began with the third dynasty of pharaohs.
After the death of the sixth dynasty’s King Pepy II, who ruled for some 94 years, the Old Kingdom period ended in chaos.
On the heels of the Old Kingdom’s collapse, the seventh and eighth dynasties consisted of a rapid succession of Memphis-based rulers until about 2160 B.C., when the central authority completely dissolved, leading to civil war between provincial governors.
During the Middle Kingdom, Egypt once again flourished, as it had during the Old Kingdom.
The kingdom also built diplomatic and trade relations with Syria, Palestine and other countries; undertook building projects including military fortresses and mining quarries; and returned to pyramid-building in the tradition of the Old Kingdom.
The Middle Kingdom reached its peak under Amenemhet III (1842-1797 B.C.); its decline began under Amenenhet IV (1798-1790 B.C.) and continued under his sister and regent, Queen Sobekneferu (1789-1786 B.C.), who was the first confirmed female ruler of Egypt and the last ruler of the 12th dynasty.
In addition to powerful kings such as Amenhotep I (1546-1526 B.C.), Thutmose I (1525-1512 B.C.) and Amenhotep III (1417-1379 B.C.), the New Kingdom was notable for the role of royal women such as Queen Hatshepsut (1503-1482 B.C.), who began ruling as a regent for her young stepson (he later became Thutmose III, Egypt’s greatest military hero), but rose to wield all the powers of a pharaoh.
The 19th and 20th dynasties, known as the Ramesside period (for the line of kings named Ramses) saw the restoration of the weakened Egyptian empire and an impressive amount of building, including great temples and cities.
All of the New Kingdom rulers (with the exception of Akhenaton) were laid to rest in deep, rock-cut tombs (not pyramids) in the Valley of the Kings, a burial site on the west bank of the Nile opposite Thebes.
The next 400 years–known as the Third Intermediate Period–saw important changes in Egyptian politics, society and culture.
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Third Intermediate Period
During the three Intermediate Periods, Egypt’s central government had difficulty controlling the country.
Ancient Egypt was one of the greatest and most powerful civilizations in the history of the world.
It lasted for over 3000 years from 3150 BC to 30 BC.
The Nile River
The civilization of Ancient Egypt was located along the Nile River in northeast Africa.
Historians usually group the history of Ancient Egypt into three major kingdoms called the Old Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, and the New Kingdom.
It was conquered by a number of other civilizations.
They were one of the first civilizations to invent writing.
THE ROOTS OF EGYPTIAN civilization go back more than 6,000 years to the beginning of settled life along the banks of the Nile River.
One of these was the unification of Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt sometime in the third millennium B.C.
With the unification of the "Two Lands" by the legendary, if not mythical, King Menes, the glorious Pharaonic Age began.
Even before the unification of the Two Lands, the Egyptians had developed a plow and a system of writing.
The legacy of ancient Egypt is written in stone across the face of the country from the pyramids of Upper Egypt to the rock tombs in the Valley of the Kings to the Old Kingdom temples of Luxor and Karnak to the Ptolemaic temples of Edfu and Dendera and to the Roman temple to Isis on Philae Island.
Through pharaonic Egypt, Africa claims to be the cradle of one of the earliest and most spectacular civilizations of antiquity.
One of the unique features of ancient Egyptian civilization was the bond between the Nile and the Egyptian people and their institutions.
Nevertheless, the most important political event in ancient Egyptian history was the unification of the two lands: the Black Land of the Delta, so-called because of the darkness of its rich soil, and the Red Land of Upper Egypt, the sun-baked land of the desert.
After the unification of the two kingdoms, the pharaoh wore the double crown symbolizing the unity of the two lands.
The unification of the two kingdoms resulted in combining the two myths concerning the gods.
After unification, each pharaoh took a Horus name that indicated that he was the reincarnation of Horus.
Some scholars believe Menes was the Horus King Narmer, whereas others prefer to regard him as a purely legendary figure.
In the course of the Early Dynastic Period, artisans and civil servants working for the central government fashioned the highly sophisticated traditions of art and learning that thereafter constituted the basic pattern of pharaonic civilization.
The Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and Second Intermediate Period, 2686 to 1552 B.C.
The Old Kingdom and the Middle Kingdom together represent an important single phase in Egyptian political and cultural development.
The reestablishment of a powerful central government during the Twelfth Dynasty, however, re-instituted the patterns of the Old Kingdom.
Thus, the Old Kingdom and the Middle Kingdom may be considered together.
The Old Kingdom ended when the central administration collapsed in the late Sixth Dynasty.
The kings of the Twelfth Dynasty restored central government control and a single strong kingship in the period known as the Middle Kingdom.
The Middle Kingdom ended with the conquest of Egypt by the Hyksos, the so-called Shepherd Kings.
Pyramid Building in the Old and Middle Kingdoms
The building and equipping of funerary monuments represented the single largest industry through the Old Kingdom and, after a break, the Middle Kingdom as well.
The channeling of so much of the country's resources into building and equipping funerary monuments may seem unproductive by modern standards, but pyramid building seems to have been essential for the growth of pharaonic civilization.
The New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552-664 B.C.
During the New Kingdom, Egypt reached the peak of its power, wealth, and territory.
Through the intensive military campaigns of Pharaoh Thutmose III (1490-1436 B.C.), Palestine, Syria, and the northern Euphrates area in Mesopotamia were brought within the New Kingdom.
Art and Architecture in the New Kingdom
As historian Cyril Aldred has said, the civilization of the New Kingdom seems the most golden of all the epochs of Egyptian history, perhaps because so much of its wealth remains.
Another New Kingdom innovation was temple building, which began with Queen Hatshepsut, who as the heiress queen seized power in default of male claimants to the throne.
During the New Kingdom, the cult of the sun god Ra became increasingly important until it evolved into the uncompromising monotheism of Pharaoh Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV, 1364-1347 B.C.).
During these years, Egyptian culture was under pressure from major civilizations of the eastern Mediterranean and the Near East.
This dynasty, which ruled from 664 to 525 B.C., represented the last great age of pharaonic civilization.
The Old Kingdom
D. Downfall of the Old Kingdom
The Middle Kingdom
B. Middle Kingdom religion
C. Middle Kingdom art
D. Downfall of the Middle Kingdom
The New Kingdom
D. Downfall of the New Kingdom
The ancient Egyptians are considered among many to be the civilization upon
Throughout the ages known as the Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and New
as well as outside influences, have molded ancient Egyptian civilization.
The Old Kingdom began in the year 2700 B.C. and ended 2200 B.C. The
wasn't until the Middle Kingdom that Egypt began to recapture the glory it once held.
anywhere near the size and splendor of those built in the Old Kingdom.
king who established order and brought the elements of civilization to his people.
The Middle Kingdom bore witness to the finest pieces of jewelry ever crafted in
against such mistakes that were made in the Old Kingdom.
In addition, the Middle Kingdom was renowned for it's literary masterpieces.
The Middle Kingdom came to an end when the Hyksos invaded Egypt and took
era, known as the New Kingdom, lasted from 1465 B.C. until 1165 B.C.
The New Kingdom included the eighteenth through twentieth dynasty.
great strength, as they did at the end of the Old Kingdom, by selling magic charms and
Not counting the still-nascent Hittite Empire, in the mid-1400s, there were really just two places in the ancient near East where there were great civilizations.
For almost 30 centuries—from its unification around 3100 B.C. to its conquest by Alexander the Great in 332 B.C.—ancient Egypt was the preeminent civilization in the Mediterranean world.
From the great pyramids of the Old Kingdom through the military conquests of the New Kingdom, Egypt’s majesty has long entranced archaeologists and historians.
More importantly, from the perspective of an ancient Israelite who left it, Egypt was civilization.
Ancient Egypt can be thought of as an oasis in the desert of northeastern Africa, dependent on the annual inundation of the Nile River to support its agricultural population.
It had all the fruits of one of the most advanced civilizations in the ancient world.
The Nile River was an important factor in the success of ancient Egypt.
Without the Nile River, it could never have existed as we know it or have produced the wonders of its civilization that it is known for today.
In the book, Cultural Atlas of Ancient Egypt, readers are taken on a journey down the Nile, and see the home the Great Pyramids of Gaza, the Giant Sphinx, and other monuments of this ancient civilization (Baines
By harnessing the power of the Nile River, and learning the consistency of the rise and fall of its water levels, they built their empire from what could have been barren wasteland; and with the use of
This influenced the way they worshiped, developing one of the first civilizations to believe in an
Even so, the Nile River did not have an especially significant role in ancient Egypt’s religious life; perhaps it was viewed as too consistent and led
The Nile River was also responsible for papyrus, or the form of paper, used to record Egyptian writing.
Eventually, the civilization of ancient Egypt collapsed, but because of the Nile, much is known about life in this ancient empire.
Though ancient Egypt society has disappeared, the waters of the Nile River
Taking your holidays in Egypt is the best value for money and you get a chance to experience and see 7,000 years of history and civilization.
Taking a moment to realize that Egypt is more than 7,000 years old and was home to one of the best documented civilizations of the world, is breath taking on its own.
You can say it is in the center of the world and is the cradle of civilization.
Egypt in the Third Intermediate Period (1070–712 B.C.)
Smendes’ reign (ca. 1070–1044 B.C.) initiated some 350 years of politically divided rule and diffused power, known as the Third Intermediate Period.
The Third Intermediate Period laid the foundation for many changes that are observable in art and culture throughout the first millennium.
The two dynasties governed Egypt simultaneously for approximately ninety years, the final stage of the Third Intermediate Period.
Preoccupied with internal rivalries during the Third Intermediate Period, Egypt gradually lost its traditional control of Nubia, located to its south.
With the weakening of centralized royal authority in the Third Intermediate Period, the temple network emerged as a dominant sphere for political aspirations, social identification, and artistic production.
Relatively little building took place during the Third Intermediate Period, but the creation of stylistically and technologically innovative bronze and precious temple statuary of gods, kings, and great temple officials flourished.
“Egypt in the Third Intermediate Period (1070–712 B.C.).”
"The Third Intermediate Period (1069–664 B.C.)."
