Brown Dog affair

I researched the history of vivisection – live animal dissection – and discovered the story of the little brown dog.
During the early 1900s protests and riots spread through London as anti-vivisectionists campaigned against experimentation on animals in response to the illegal dissection of a little brown dog.
Anti-vivisectionists commissioned a bronze statue of the dog to be erected as a memorial, antagonising medical students or “anti-doggers” and resulting in the statue being removed under the cover of darkness.
In 1985 another statue, commissioned by the National Anti-Vivisection Society, was erected in Battersea Park and remains there today.
Starling, along with his brother-in-law William Bayliss, conducted an experiment where they stripped away the nervous tissue surrounding the large intestine.
Unbeknownst to them their classes had been infiltrated by two women from Sweden who were anti-vivisection activists.
However, the arguments did not end with politicians, and anti-vivisection campaigners decided to erect a memorial to the dog in Battersea Park with a plaque which read:
In memory of the brown terrier dog done to death in the laboratories of University College in February, 1903, after having endured vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one vivisector to another till death came to his release.
Medical students in London were angered by the plaque, believing that vivisection was vital to their studies and the advancement of medical science.
The climax of what is now known as “The Brown Dog Affair” occurred in December 1907 where riots broke out both in Battersea and central London and the medical students clashed with police and anti-vivisection campaigners.
Tags: 1876 Cruelty To Animals Act, animal experimentation, anti-vivisection riots, Art Museum, endocrine system, Ernest Henry Starling, hormones, physiology, portraiture, secretin, The Brown Dog Affair, vivisection, Walter Westley Russell, William Bayliss
Brown Dog affair
The Browndog affair ( en: Brown Dog affair) was a political controversy about intervention on live animals for scientific purposes ( vivisection ) in Edwardian England ( 1902-1910 ).
It was triggered in February 1903 by the accusation, William Bayliss had made an illegal dissection of a brown Terriers at the Department of Physiology at University College London - by its own account under proper anesthesia, according to the Antivivisektionisten fully conscious.
Unlike today, the term vivisection completed the dissection of living animals, with or without anesthesia, usually for the training of medical students, a.
( NAVS, such as: British society against vivisection ) At the time, were performed annually in the United Kingdom, approximately 300 animal experiments.
In the early twentieth century studied Ernest Starling and William Bayliss his brother a thesis of Ivan Pavlov, via interactions between the nervous system and pancreas with the aid of vivisection.
Bayliss and Starling have 1899 described peristalsis through experiments with vivisection.
In his estimation, had the testimony of the women, according to which the dog used for a total of three experiments, killed by a student and also jokes and fun were driven during the vivisection was not sufficient to enforce a conviction under the Cruelty to Animals Act.
The chapter Fun ( "fun" ), which described next to the vivisection also perceived as unconcerned behavior of fellow students, was held descriptive and renamed The vivisection of the brown dog.
" Was in memory of the brown terrier, which was launched in February 1903 in the laboratories of the University College of London to death after he had to endure two months of vivisection and passed from one Vivisector to another until death released him.
Behind the Pump House Battersea Park founded the National Society and the British Antivivisection Union for the Abolition of Vivisection on 12 December 1985 a new statue, which was presented by Geraldine James.
It stands for the rejection of the vivisection and animal testing by the London people.
(Son of William Bayliss ) The 'Brown Dog' Affair in potential, the UCL Physiology magazine, Spring 1957, no. 2, pp. 11-22.
" Sir William Bayliss, 1860-1924 ", '' The Bugle 2003 documentation at the Wolverhampton University Society of Local History
Animal Welfare & Anti- vivisection 1870-1910: Nineteenth Century Woman's mission.
To understand the gravity of this winsome canine sculpture, we have to go back to 1903, when allegations of inhumane (and illegal) experimentation on a brown terrier at University College London caused an outrage.
Although the medical professor in question won his ensuing libel case, the incident inspired a groundswell of support for the British anti-vivisection movement.
A well-established center of progressive politics, Battersea was home to London’s only anti-vivisection hospital (which neither conducted animal experiments, nor employed physicians who approved of the practice) and thus was friendly territory for the statue and its supporters.
The memorial featured a bronze sculpture of the now-infamous brown terrier, drinking fountains for humans and dogs alike, and an inscription that detailed the suffering of the pooch, called out University College London by name, and advocated for the abolition of such experimentation.
Medical students at UCL were incensed, arguing that the dog had been properly anaesthetized (possibly true), that no law had been broken (also possibly true), and that anti-vivisectionists were superstitious, sentimental idiots impeding The Advance of Science (incontrovertible proof that med students have been imperious and condescending since at least 1906).
Though foiled by the round-the-clock police protection that had been assigned to the dog statue, the incident kicked off the Brown Dog Riots that saw medical students from various prestigious English universities clashing in the streets of Battersea with anti-vivisectionists, suffragettes, trade unionists, socialists, and other progressive factions, as well as fighting police in Trafalgar Square.
However, the anti-vivisection movement remains active in the UK, and the Brown Dog Affair remains an emblematic event in the history of the cause.
William Bayliss
An English physiologist, William Bayliss was the co-discoverer of the peptide hormone called secretin which he and Ernest Starling jointly researched about.
William Bayliss was born William MaddockBayliss on the second of May in 1860 in Butcroft, Wednesbury.
He was not able to complete his apprenticeship and he took a different road when he went to the University College London in 1881.
After finishing his degree, he took a teaching post in the University College London from 1888-1912.
Ernest Henry Starling, another notable name which almost always pops up along with Bayliss’s, was also a physiologist who worked at the University College London.
So much was the importance of their discovery that the “Bayliss Clubs” in America are named after William Bayliss.
Stephen Coleridge who was then the Secretary of the National Anti-Vivesection Society addressed the Society that a certain brown dog was vivesected at the University College London and the procedure was done by Bayliss.
Come 1912, Bayliss was appointed as the Professor of General Physiology at University College London.
Two years before he died, Sir William Bayliss was knighted after which he lived in Hampstead and continued working as the director of their family business which his uncle started.
Leonard Ernest Bayliss followed the footsteps of his father and also became a physiologist and studied under the wing of Starling at the University College London.
Anti-vivisectionists who had infiltrated medical lectures at the University College London reported abuse of the canine subjects of medical research and teaching.
The researchers sued for libel, claiming that they were within the law.
The brown dog—a terrier—whose vivisection had been the focal point of the case, became a cause célèbre.
In 1906, a memorial to the brown dog was erected in Battersea in the form of a drinking fountain for both dogs and humans, surmounted by a statue of a dog by sculptor Joseph Whitehead.reference 1 As social and cultural historian Hilda Kean notes, it was unusual that “this was a dog without a name…[and that] the rationale for the monument did not emanate from a personal relationship between a ‘pet’ dog and his carer…The statue's function was both to commemorate the untimely death of the brown dog (thereby gaining publicity for the anti-vivisectionist cause) and to chastize scientists for their own absence of ‘human’ qualities, including lack of compassion toward an apparently trusting dog.”
What Kean does not note is the striking similarity of the original memorial to the Monument to a Dog at the Institute of Experimental Medicine in St. Petersburg, Russia where Pavlov did his research, in part through vivisection.
It is taken from a postcard published by the British National Anti-Vivisection Society in 1906.
‘IN MEMORY of the Brown Terrier Dog done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured Vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his Release.
That was the state of affair in the early 1900s when a campaign again vivisection led to pitched battles between medical students and workers with mounted police caught in the middle.
The controversy started in 1903 when Professor William Bayliss (knighted in 1922 for his contribution to medicine) took part in an experiment on a brown terrier dog at the University of London.
Anti-vivisection campaigners (two women from Sweden) who had infiltrated his lecture protested that the dog was not properly anaesthetised – an illegal act.
The National Anti-Vivisection Society took up the case and Bayliss sued for libel.
It was also closely tied to the anti-vivisection movement, being the home of Battersea Dogs Home and Battersea General Hospital, which even refused to employ doctors who agreed with the practise.
Archer was a strong supporter of the anti- vivisection movement and London’s first black councillor, later being its first black mayor (see below).
In 1906, anti-vivisection campaigners unveiled a memorial in Battersea, London, as a new weapon in their long-running propaganda war.
A celebrated libel trial focused attention on the plight of one brown terrier dog, the subject of physiological experiments and classroom demonstrations at University College London.
In 1985, anti-vivisection groups sponsored a replacement, a re-interpretation, and secured its position in a prominent spot of Battersea Park.
His anti-vivisection perspective is plain.
It may be thought that campaigns against animal vivisection are a product of our modern world, that our increased concern with animal welfare is a relatively new concept only surfacing since the 1960s.
Known as The Brown Dog Affair, this controversy about vivisection raged in Edwardian England from 1903 until 1910.
It included the infiltration of University of London medical lectures by two Swedish anti-vivisection campaigners, a four day libel trial, pitched battles in the street and a nightly police guard of a statue.
It all started in February 1903 when it was claimed that William Bayliss of the Department of Physiology at University College London performed an illegal dissection in front of an audience of 60 medical students on a brown terrier dog.
The dog had first been operated on in front of students a couple of months earlier, and then kept in a cage until the lecture in February 1903 where it was opened up again and then subjected to more vivisection and half an hour of electric shocks before finally being killed by a research student.
The procedure was condemned as unlawful by the National Anti-Vivisection Society, because by subjecting the dog to more than one experiment the 1876 Cruelty to Animals Act had been breached.
The National Anti-Vivisection Society takes a stand
The women had taken their story and notes they had made to The Hon. Stephen Coleridge, Honorary Secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society.
Coleridge made a public statement about the dog's vivisection and death at an anti-vivisection meeting in St James' Hall, London, which was reported in the press and led to Dr Bayliss sueing for libel.
Then anti-vivisectionists decided to commission a statue of the dog as a permanent memorial which was unveiled in Battersea in 1906.
‘In Memory of the Brown Terrier Dog done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured Vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his Release.
It was commissioned by the National Anti-Vivisection Society and the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection
It represented the revulsion of the people of London to vivisection and animal experimentation.
The National Anti-Vivisection Society was founded in 1875 by Frances Power Cobbe, a humanitarian who published many leaflets and articles opposing animal experiments and gathered many notable people of the day to support the cause, including Queen Victoria.
and on the National Anti-Vivisection Society website.
The drama began in December 1902, when two female anti-vivisectionists from Sweden infiltrated the medical school at University College London and bore witness to the cruelty perpetrated against one particular brown terrier.
For the next two months, the terrier was confined to a cage where his miserable howling upset several UCL staff, until he was brought back to the lecture theatre in February 1903.
When the Swedish women exposed the inhumane and prolonged suffering of this unfortunate unnamed dog, the researchers of UCL sued for libel – claiming that they were within the law.
“In Memory of the Brown Terrier Dog Done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903 after having endured Vivisections extending over more than two months and having been handed over from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his release.
The statue – with its bold and brazen anti-vivisectionist inscription – became a symbolic rallying point for political activists.
Over a century later, the repugnant and unnecessary practice of vivisection – torture by any other name – still continues.
The trigger for the controversy was an allegation an illegal vivisection had been performed by William Bayliss before 60 medical students.
The procedure was condemned by the National Anti-Vivisection Society, meanwhile Bayliss argued that dog had been properly anaesthetised.
The anti-vivisection movement became linked with the womens’ rights movement and suffrage, and meetings in London were often interrupted by pro-vivisection protestors.
On my recent visit there was a fresh posy of flowers suggesting that despite the best efforts of many, the controversy around the brown dog – and vivisection more generally – still survives.
The object is ‘The Brown Dog Affair’, a set of papers about the events that followed a vivisection on a dog in a lecture theatre at University College London (UCL) in 1903.
The UCL records file ‘The Brown Dog Affair’ consists mostly of correspondence between former UCL Provost Ifor Evans and physiologist Leonard Bayliss, son of Dr. William Bayliss.There are also press cuttings, a postcard, and court transcripts referring to the events of 1903, which are believed to have survived UCL bombings in World War II.
The ‘Brown Dog Affair’ started in 1903, with an experiment on a brown dog in a lecture theatre at UCL by Dr. William Bayliss.
The ‘Brown Dog Affair’ started in 1903, with an experiment on a brown dog in a lecture theatre at UCL by Dr. William Bayliss.
In the 1950s, at the time of the correspondence, vivisection was still a much-publicized concern.
To this effect, animals were also being tested for the effects of poison gas and atomic bombs.There were a number of demonstrations outside the actual laboratories where vivisection was taking place, namely in England.
However, Evans is quoted again showing his uncertainty on the issue: "I think it is very important that the students should know about this whole affair, On the other hand, I feel like the publication may raise the whole anti-vivisectionist issue’ [...] the less publicity we have, the smoother things will be".
There is a clear transition from the 1900’s – when one could sue for defamation on grounds of a vivisection and win – in comparison with the 1950s, when the issue had become much more widely criticized and one had to be cautious in publicly taking a position.
The Brown Dog affair was a political controversy that occurred during the first decade of the Twentieth Century, paving the way for modern animal welfare and anti animal testing lobbies in the UK.
If it wasn’t for The Brown Dog, an anonymous subject of vivisection that was killed and then later immortalised as a statue, the debate about vivisection would not have happened.
Riots happened in and around University College London in response to the inscription on The Brown Dog’s memorial, which read.
“In Memory of the Brown Terrier Dog done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured Vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his Release.
Medical students were outraged and libel suits were filed from many sides, but for the first time in history the realities of vivisection and animal testing were brought to the attention of the public and a debate was raised that still continues today.
The Brown Dog represents all of the dogs that had, up until 1903, been the subject of vivisection.
If it wasn’t for The Brown Dog, people wouldn’t have felt compelled to protest and the matter of vivisection could have been clouded in uncertainty for many more years, holding up the animal welfare movement.
Erected in memory of dogs that were used in vivisection experiments at the beginning of the last century, the story behind the statue is one far from quietness and serenity.Original Brown Dog Sculpture
It bears a plaque which says that it was erected ‘In memory of the brown terrier dog done to death in the laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed over from one vivisector to another till death came to his release.
The early 1900’s were experimental times in medicine and there was a large pro-vivisectionist lobby who took great exception to the statue and, in particular, the wording on the plaque.
What followed were more pro-vivisection marches in London, threats of legal action, the burning of effigies, more attempts at attacking the statue despite police guards and newspaper support for those for and those against ‘the dog’.
In December 1985 a new brown dog memorial was erected by Geraldine James, a Battersea resident and anti-vivisectionist, on a site behind the Pump House.
The term “vivisection” is used today to refer to all animal experimentation, but its original meaning was the practice of surgery and dissection on live animals by medical researchers.
Original Brown Dog statue in Battersea, London--© National Anti-Vivisection Society.
The presence of two witnesses interested in the welfare of animals brought publicity to the final incident and to the cruelties of Edwardian-era vivisection.
He was a terrier-type dog used as an experimental subject at the medical school of University College London.
Britain’s National Anti-Vivisection Society (no relation to the U.S. group of the same name)—which then, as now, was in the forefront of animal protection efforts, and whose history is intimately connected with the Brown Dog Affair—gives the following description of what was done to the dog:
[In December 1902] Professor Starling at University College London performed his first operation on the terrier dog, depriving it of the use of its pancreas.
In February 1903, Professor Starling opened up the dog’s abdomen to inspect the result of the first operation.
In the audience that day were two Swedish anti-vivisectionists who had enrolled as students in order to document such incidents.
The story of the dog was included among their evidence of cruelty in vivisection.
The book came to the attention of Stephen Coleridge, secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society, who realized that two anti-cruelty laws had been broken in the animal’s handling: he had not been anesthetized, and he had been used in more than one experiment.
It drew many allies to the antivivisectionist cause and galvanized the movement.
An antivivisectionist benefactor donated the funds for a memorial that was placed in the London Borough of Battersea, at the Latchmere Recreation Ground.
In Memory of the Brown Terrier Dog Done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903 after having endured Vivisections extending over more than two months and having been handed over from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his release.
It was anticipated from the beginning that pro-vivisectionists, who had been rumbling about the proposed statue, would move on to full-blown protests, and the sponsors of the statue also provided money to indemnify the borough council for any damages or legal proceedings that might arise.
Medical students, medical professionals, and their sympathizers complained of the accusatory nature of the inscription and the very impulse to commemorate the death of a vivisection subject let alone impugn the practice of vivisection in general.
This censure brought matters to a head for the vivisection defenders.
At the same time, the residents of Battersea and anti-vivisectionists also gathered in response to the protestors, and meetings between the two sides resulted in violent skirmishes known as the Brown Dog Riots.
(It is interesting to note that today, when animal welfare activists rather than vivisection sympathizers destroy property in order to—as they say—promote their own moral values, they are often termed terrorists and new legal definitions of “terrorism” are coined to support that judgment.)
Second Brown Dog statue, now in the Old English Garden, Battersea Park--© National Anti-Vivisection Society.
The anti-vivisection movement continued throughout the 20th century, and groups like Britain’s National Anti-Vivisection Society continued to lead the way in that country.
In this regard the current Brown Dog memorial is less like something on a hero’s public monument (such as Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar Square) than the original was—not a stoic “Everydog” victim of vivisection but a pet-like and sympathetic individual.
Images: The original Brown Dog statue in Battersea, London; the second Brown Dog statue, now in the Old English Garden, Battersea Park—both © National Anti-Vivisection Society.
Home page of the [UK] National Anti-Vivisection Society
“The little brown dog,” National Anti-Vivisection Society
Helen Pridley, “Sir William Bayliss, 1860-1924,” The Bugle 2003, Wolverhampton University Local History Society
After 76 years, the statue of the ‘Brown Dog’, a famous terrier who had been the victim of vivisection at University College, London, had been replaced.
The issue of the Brown Dog was a key feature in the first undercover investigation of animal experiments by anti-vivisectionists, and the subject of the 1903 Bayliss-Coleridge libel case - Dr Bayliss of London University versus the Honorary Secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society.
The story of the Brown Dog and his memorial goes back to December 1902, when Professor Starling at University College London performed his first operation on the terrier dog, depriving it of the use of its pancreas.
In February 1903, Professor Starling opened up the dog’s abdomen to inspect the result of the first operation.
Two Swedish anti-vivisectionists, Leisa Schartau and Louise Lind-af-Hageby, who had enrolled as students at the London School of Medicine for Women so that they could learn first-hand about the work in such laboratories, attended that lecture demonstration.
They decided to show their diary, which was now a substantial manuscript, to the Honorary Secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society, the Hon. Stephen Coleridge.
The Hon. Stephen Coleridge, who took up the appointment of Honorary Secretary in 1897 (remaining until 1936) came from a family of committed anti-vivisectionists; his father had been one of NAVS’ vice-presidents and Stephen had not been converted to, but born into the cause.
It described how the supposedly serious business of vivisection demonstrations in medical schools were often no more than entertainments.
The subject of such mirth in the chapter - a brown terrier dog - was not particularly emphasised.
Coleridge refused to apologise, insisting that Professor Starling, under the 1876 Act, should have killed the dog as soon as the object of the experiment had been attained, that is after he had performed his second vivisection.
For many, the Brown Dog affair could not be easily forgotten and the outcome of the trial continued to rankle.
Edward Ford in his book, ‘The Brown Dog and His Memorial’ published in 1908, recalls how he first came to learn about the Brown Dog affair.
’In Memory of the Brown Terrier Dog done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured Vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his Release.
They argued that the majority of universities were also involved in the practice of vivisection.
The NAVS, which all those years ago was the defendant in the ‘Brown Dog Trial’, had succeeded in bringing the attention of the public to the suffering of laboratory animals, and still believes today that vivisection can only continue whilst it is carried out in secret.
About 100 medical students from University College London stormed a small square at Latchmere, trying to tear down a bronze statue of a dog.
The real issue was vivisection, which was an explosive controversy in early 20th century England.
The brown terrier survived this procedure, and was used again in February 1903 by Starling, another physician named William Bayliss, and a medical student, Henry Dale, who years later would go on to win a Nobel Prize for medicine.
Anti-vivisectionists, such as this group pictured in Washington in 1913, were often active for feminist causes too.
There were two problems with the February 1903 experiment.
The second was that the operating theater had been infiltrated by two Swedish animal rights activists, Lizzy Lind af Hageby and Leisa Schartau, who had enrolled in medical school in London specifically to gain visibility for the anti-vivisection issue.
The anti-vivisectionists refused to give up.
The riots that eventually happened on December 10 were the culmination of five days of increasing rancor between anti-vivisectionists and irate college students.
The anti-vivisection lobby, noisy and hyperbolic though they were seen by the British public, heavily overlapped with another interest group: those advocating women’s suffrage.
Not all anti-vivisectionists were suffragists nor vice-versa, but the medical students appealed to anti-suffrage sentiment in order to gain adherents to their cause against the brown dog statue.
The disproportionate gender identities of the groups–the medical students were overwhelmingly men, the high-profile vivisectionists counting a high number of women among them–suggests there were sexual politics at work here.
She was tangentially caught up in the Brown Dog affair.
Anti-vivisectionists continued to campaign for its return but without success–at least not for a long time.
