Assassination of William McKinley

The Assassination of President William McKinley, 1901
In less than a year McKinley’s presidency was cut short by an assassin's bullet delivered in Buffalo, New York.
September 6, 1901
In September 1901 the President scheduled a visit to the Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo, NY.
Arriving on September 6, President McKinley welcomed visitors at the Exposition’s stadium followed by a short reception at the Temple of Music.
McKinley stood at the head of the reception line in the Temple of Music.
A slim, 28-year-old man named Leon Czolgosz approached.
Czolgosz, a self-proclaimed anarchist, had been deeply affected by the treatment of the Slavic miners during the coal strikes of 1897.
We join his account as the President enters the Temple of Music:
"In the capacity of Exposition representative of the Buffalo Morning Review I was called upon to cover the visit of President McKinley to the Pan-American Exposition on that memorable Friday when the Chief Executive of this great nation was stricken by an assassin.
Outside the Temple of Music was a dense crowd, fully fifteen thousand in number, all attracted there by the President's reception.
They little imagined that, within, the President was writhing in pain, the victim of an anarchist's bullet.
This eyewitness account appeared in: Wells, John D., "The Story of an Eye-Witness to the Shooting of the President, Collier's Weekly 21 Sept. 1901; Gould, Lewis L., The Presidency of William McKinley (1980); Seale, William, The President's House: A History (1986).
"The Assassination of President William McKinley, 1901," EyeWitness to History, www.eyewitnesstohistory.com (2010).
Abraham Lincoln 	April 14, 1865 	Ford's Theatre, 511 10th Street NW
William McKinley 	Sept. 6, 1901 	Pan-American Exposition, Temple of Music, 34 Fordham Drive
Buffalo, New York 	McKinley was shot at close range as he was greeting the public.
He died on September 14, 1901 in Buffalo from gangrene caused by the bullet wounds.
Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln's Assassination website
Abraham Lincoln Assassination from the Library of Congress
PBS' The American Experience: The Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Documentary about the Abraham Lincoln Assassination
Abraham Lincoln Assassination artifacts from the Library of Congress
Abraham Lincoln Assassination and Memorial links
Biography of John Wilkes Booth (assassin of Abraham Lincoln)
Odd Facts about Abraham Lincoln Assassination
Who Killed James A. Garfield?
William McKinley
The Assassination of President William McKinley from crimelibrary.com
Leon Czolgosz biography (McKinley Assassin)
Trial of Leon Czolgosz
Images of Leon Czolgosz
U.S. President William McKinley Assassinated
A picture of U.S. President William McKinley.
President William McKinley.
On September 6, 1901, anarchist Leon Czolgosz walked up to U.S. President William McKinley at the Pan-American Exposition in New York and shot McKinley at point-blank range.
After the shooting, it first appeared that President McKinley was getting better; however, he soon took a turn for the worse and died on September 14 from gangrene.
Greeting People at the Pan-American Exposition
On September 6, 1901, U.S. President William McKinley spent the morning visiting Niagara Falls with his wife before returning to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York in the afternoon to spend a few minutes greeting the public.
By about 3:30 p.m., President McKinley stood inside the Temple of Music building at the Exposition, ready to begin shaking the hands of the public as they streamed into the building.
Unbeknownst to the President and the many guards who stood nearby, among those waiting outside was 28-year-old anarchist Leon Czolgosz who was planning to kill President McKinley.
At 4 p.m. the doors to the building were opened and the mass of people waiting outside were forced into a single line as they entered the Temple of Music building.
However, at 4:07 p.m. Leon Czolgosz had made it into the building and it was his turn to greet the President.
At 2:15 a.m. on September 14, 1901, President William McKinley died of gangrene.
After being pummeled right after the shooting, Leon Czolgosz had been arrested and taken to police headquarters before nearly being lynched by the angry crowds that surrounded the Temple of Music.
On October 29, 1901, Leon Czolgosz was electrocuted.
William McKinley: What You Should Know About the 25th President
The Major Historical Events of William McKinley's Presidency
Quotes from William McKinley
In the late afternoon of September 6, 1901, the city of Buffalo, New York, was thrust into the spotlight for what some would call the "Queen City's Darkest Moment in History."
While attending the Pan-American Exposition, President William McKinley was assassinated at a reception in the Temple of Music.
President McKinley Shot While at Reception at Temple of Music!
Leon Czolgosz -- Another View of the Assassination
The Death of William McKinley
The Funeral of William McKinley.
President McKinley's Farewell Address at the Pan-American Exposition.
The Trial and Execution of Leon Czolgosz.
Man Walks from Lincoln, Nebraska to the Pan-American Exposition.
Abraham Lincoln's Son and Assassinations (1864 - 1901)
Robert Todd Lincoln was the oldest son of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln.
However, he was either present or nearby when three presidential assassinations occurred: Abraham Lincoln, James A. Garfield, and William McKinley.
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Assassination of James A. Garfield
Robert Lincoln was U.S. President James A. Garfield's Secretary of War.
Assassination of William McKinley
On September 6, 1901 Robert was invited by President William McKinley to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, where the President was giving a speech.
An anarchist, Leon F. Czolgosz, then shot President McKinley twice in the abdomen.
Robert Lincoln, eldest son of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln, had his life saved by the brother of John Wilkes Booth, who assassinated his father.
Robert witnessed the assassination of President James A. Garfield and was nearby when William McKinley was shot.
The Legal Aftermath of the Assassination of William McKinley
President William McKinley
Portrait of William McKinley.
Source: The Life of William McKinley, Including a Genealogical Record of the McKinley Family and Copious Extracts From the Late President's Public Speeches, Messages to Congress, Proclamations, and Other State Papers.
On September 5, 1901, Leon Czolgosz unsuccessfully sought an opportunity to assassinate President McKinley at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo.
At the Temple of Music, while McKinley was in a greeting line, Leon Czolgosz fired two shots into the President.
"The Confession of Leon Czolgosz".
On September 14, 1901 President McKinley died of gangrene at the home of John G. Milburn, president of the Pan-American Exposition.
On September 26, 1901 at 2:00 p.m. Judge White sentenced Leon Czolgosz to death by electric chair at Auburn State Prison.
Police Photograph and Report of Leon Czolgosz.
Source: Facsimile of the Police Report filed September 6, 1901.
The assassination of President McKinley by an avowed anarchist, only compounded Americans' fears, already stirred by such recent events as the assassinations of King Humberto of Italy and Empress Elizabeth of Austria and the Haymarket and Homestead riots in the United States.
The focus of this fear was the anarchist movement, and the relationship of this ideology to immigrants.
State and federal legislation began to target anarchists, with bills being introduced almost immediately to expel avowed anarchists from the country and to prohibit their entry into the United States from other countries.
President William McKinley: Assassinated by an Anarchist
Leon Czolgosz stood in line and counted the people between him and the president of the United States.
He had waited for more than two hours in 82-degree heat on September 6, 1901, for his turn to shake hands with President William McKinley, who was visiting the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York.
The event was more than halfway through its six-month run when President McKinley, the most popular chief executive since Abraham Lincoln, arrived.
McKinley’s final public appearance in Buffalo was an afternoon reception in the Temple of Music, an ornate red-brick hall on the exposition grounds.
On September 5 an estimated 50,000 people, including Leon Czolgosz, had listened to the president’s speech.
Since 1894, anarchists had assassinated four European leaders — President Sadi Carnot of France, Empress Elizabeth of Austria, King Humbert of Italy, and Spanish statesman Cnovas del Castillo.
In the United States, an anarchist had attacked industrialist Henry Clay Frick, in part for his role in the failed Homestead strike.
Cleveland resident Leon Czolgosz fit the profile perfectly.
Two weeks before he traveled to Buffalo, Czolgosz attended a lecture given by the nation’s most notorious anarchist leader, Emma Goldman.
Surrounded by his entourage inside the Temple of Music, McKinley enjoyed the opportunity to meet his admirers.
Suddenly, Leon Czolgosz thrust his bandaged right hand into the president’s chest.
Secretary of State John Hay had already experienced the assassinations of two presidents — the first as a personal secretary to Abraham Lincoln and the second as a personal friend and confidant of James Garfield.
As doctors had removed the president to John Milburn’s house after surgery, another spectacle was playing out across town at police headquarters, where the anarchist’s life was in as great a peril as McKinley’s had been.
A self-described anarchist and disciple of Emma Goldman, Czolgosz said he had acted alone.
William McKinley
William McKinley (January 29, 1843 – September 14, 1901) was the 25th President of the United States, serving from March 4, 1897 until his assassination in September 1901.
President McKinley was assassinated by an anarchist in September 1901, and was succeeded by Vice President Theodore Roosevelt.
Traveling mostly by rail, the McKinleys were to travel through the South to the Southwest, and then up the Pacific coast and east again, to conclude with a visit on June 13, 1901 to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York.
Although McKinley enjoyed meeting the public, Cortelyou was concerned with his security due to recent assassinations by anarchists in Europe, and twice tried to remove a public reception from the President's rescheduled visit to the Exposition.
One man in the crowd, anarchist Leon Czolgosz, hoped to assassinate McKinley.
Czolgosz, since hearing a speech by fellow anarchist Emma Goldman in Cleveland, had decided to do something heroic (in his own mind) for the cause.
After the failure on the 5th, Czolgosz waited the next day at the Temple of Music on the Exposition grounds, where the President was to meet the public after his return from Niagara Falls.
The anarchist concealed his gun in a handkerchief, and when he reached the head of the line, shot McKinley twice in the abdomen.
In the photo above, President William McKinley is shown walking up the steps at the Temple of Music at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York just minutes before he was shot.
At the Pan-American Exposition, President McKinley spent time attending receptions, meeting dignitaries, and shaking hands with visitors to the fair.
It was this thoughtfulness which led William McKinley to deflect worries by his personal secretary George B. Cortelyou that the public receptions at the Pan-American Exposition might be a security risk.
"  It was the way that McKinley put other people first that caused him to notice the man in line at the Temple of Music with a bandaged right hand and decide to reach to shake the man’s other hand.
The man with the bandaged hand was Leon Czolgosz, a 28-year-old unemployed mill worker originally from Detroit.
The son of Polish immigrants, Czolgosz had become interested in anarchism and after witnessing a speech by famed anarchist Emma Goldman, Czolgosz decided to make a statement by killing the President.
On September 6th, Czoglosz got as close as one could be to the President of the United States and took advantage of William McKinley’s kindness.
As the line queued in the Temple of Music, President McKinley shook hands while surrounded by his personal secretary, Cortelyou, the Exposition’s administrator, John Milburn, and a Secret Service agent.
The photo above shows the inside of the Temple of Music and an "x” marks the spot where President McKinley stood to shake hands with Leon Czolgosz at 4:07 PM on September 6, 1901.
Lying on the floor of the Pan-American Exposition’s Temple of Music, President McKinley thought of his ailing wife.
At 2:15 AM on September 14th, President William McKinley died.
Ironically, President McKinley could have been saved by an X-Ray machine and at the Pan-American Exposition that day there was an experimental X-Ray machine on display.
President William McKinley dies on September 14, 1901 of complications from bullet wounds inflicted by Leon Czolgosz.
Czolgosz, an anarchist, shot the President during one of his public appearances at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York.
September 6, 1901.
President William McKinley is shot at the Pan American Exposition in Buffalo, NY.
Anarchist Leon Czolgosz is arrested in connection with the attack.
McKinley, Czolgosz, Roosevelt, assassinated, trial, anarchist, executed, funeral
"William McKinley, President.
"The Nation Mourns the Death of its Beloved President, William McKinley," The Honolulu Republican (Honolulu, HI), September 25, 1901, Image 1, Page 1, col. 1.
"Leon Czolgosz Sentenced to Die," The Houston Daily Post (Houston, TX), September 27, 1901, Page 1, Image 1, col. 2.
Wounded in the Breast and Abdomen He is Resting Easily One Bullet Extracted, Other Cannot Be Found Assassin is Leon Czolgosz of Cleveland, Who Says He is an Anarchist and Follower of Emma Goldman
--President McKinley, while holding a reception in the Temple of Music at the Pan-American Exposition at 4 o'clock this afternoon, was shot and twice wounded by Leon Czolgosz, an Anarchist, who lives in Cleveland.
Signed by George B. Cortelyou, Secretary to the President."
Leon Czolgosz, the assassin, has signed a confession, covering six pages of foolscap in which he states that he is an Anarchist and that he became an enthusiastic member of that body through the influence of Emma Goldman, whose writings he had read and whose lectures he had listened to.
--Czolgosz's attempt on the life of the President was made at about 4 o'clock in the Temple of Music, where Mr. McKinley had gone to hold a reception at that hour.
Mrs. McKinley proceeded to the Mission Building and the President went directly to the Temple of Music.
Upon his right stood John G. Milburn of Buffalo, President of the Pan-American Exposition, chatting with the President, and introducing to him persons of note who approached.
As soon as the crowd in the Temple of Music had been dispersed sufficiently the President was removed in the automobile ambulance and taken to the Exposition Hospital, where an examination was made.
The Assassination of William McKinley
While attending the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, President William McKinley was shot twice by Leon Czolgosz, an anarchist.
Waiting in line was Leon Czolgosz, the native-born son of Polish immigrants.
Czolgosz fancied himself an anarchist after hearing a speech by Emma Goldman in 1898.
However, he was not a member of any known anarchist organization, and was even suspected by them as being a spy.
Czolgosz seems to have been inspired by the July 29, 1900 assassination of King Umberto I of Italy by an anarchist.
President McKinley Addressing the Pan-American Exposition, September 5, 1901 |
Leon Czolgosz, 1900
Leon Czolgosz waited in the Presidential reception line inside the Temple of Music with a .32 caliber Iver-Johnson "Safety Automatic" revolver concealed in a handkerchief wrapped around his right hand, giving the impression of a bandaged wound.
The president went into shock and died on September 14, eight days after the shooting.
Leon Czolgosz was tried for murder, found guilty, and executed by electric chair on October 29, 1901.
President William McKinley is shot
On this day in 1901, President William McKinley is shaking hands at the Pan-American Exhibition in Buffalo, New York, when a 28-year-old anarchist named Leon Czolgosz approaches him and fires two shots into his chest.
As a young adult, he gravitated toward socialist and anarchist ideology.
William McKinley
This article is about the 25th President of the United States.
For other people with the same name, see William McKinley (disambiguation).
William McKinley
25th President of the United States
Buffalo, New York, U.S.
William McKinley (January 29, 1843 – September 14, 1901) was the 25th President of the United States, serving from March 4, 1897, until his assassination in September 1901, six months into his second term.
However, his legacy was quickly cut short when he was shot on September 6, 1901 and died eight days later due to his injury, by Leon Czolgosz, a second-generation Polish-American with anarchist leanings; McKinley was succeeded by Vice President Theodore Roosevelt.
William McKinley at age 15
William McKinley, Jr. was born in 1843 in Niles, Ohio, the seventh child of William and Nancy (née Allison) McKinley.
[9] Among them were McKinley and his cousin William McKinley Osbourne, who enlisted as privates in the newly formed Poland Guards in June 1861.
After Cedar Creek, the army stayed in the vicinity through election day, when McKinley cast his first presidential ballot, for the incumbent Republican, Abraham Lincoln.
Further information: United States presidential election, 1896 and William McKinley presidential campaign, 1896
It is unclear when William McKinley began to seriously prepare a run for president.
Historic recording of William McKinley.
File:William McKinley 1897 inauguration.oggPlay media
Chief Justice Melville Fuller swears in William McKinley as president; outgoing President Grover Cleveland at right.
[116] Nevertheless, McKinley sent his cousin, William McKinley Osborne, to have dinner with the 73-year-old senator; he reported back that Sherman seemed as lucid as ever.
[124] For most of McKinley's administration, George B. Cortelyou served as his personal secretary.
Main article: List of federal judges appointed by William McKinley
Traveling mostly by rail, the McKinleys were to travel through the South to the Southwest, and then up the Pacific coast and east again, to conclude with a visit on June 13, 1901, to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York.
Main article: Assassination of William McKinley
McKinley entering the Temple of Music on September 6, 1901, shortly before the shots were fired.
Although McKinley enjoyed meeting the public, Cortelyou was concerned with his security due to recent assassinations by anarchists in Europe, such as the assassination of King Umberto I of Italy the previous year, and twice tried to remove a public reception from the President's rescheduled visit to the Exposition.
One man in the crowd, Leon Czolgosz, hoped to assassinate McKinley.
[213] Czolgosz, since hearing a speech by anarchist Emma Goldman in Cleveland, had decided to do something heroic (in his own mind) for the cause.
After his failure to get close enough on the fifth, Czolgosz waited the next day at the Temple of Music on the Exposition grounds, where the President was to meet the public.
There was a widespread expectation that Ida McKinley would not long survive her husband; one family friend stated, as William McKinley lay dying, that they should be prepared for a double funeral.
McKinley's name is also used in the large inner-city Honolulu, Hawaii high school, President William McKinley High School.
The official Presidential portrait of William McKinley
The 25th President of the United States, William McKinley was shot and fatally wounded on September 6, 1901, inside the Temple of Music on the grounds of the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York.
McKinley was shaking hands with the public when he was shot twice by a man named Leon Czolgosz.
The President died on September 14 from gangrene caused by the bullet wounds.
William McKinley
William McKinley was the 25th President of the United States, serving from March 4, 1897, until his assassination on September 14, 1901, after leading the nation to victory in the Spanish-American War and raising protective tariffs to promote American industry.
At the 1896 Republican Convention, in time of depression, the wealthy Cleveland businessman Marcus Alonzo Hanna ensured the nomination of his friend William McKinley as "the advance agent of prosperity."
He was standing in a receiving line at the Buffalo Pan-American Exposition when a deranged anarchist shot him twice.
Date of murder: September 6, 1901
Victim profile: William McKinley, Jr., 58, the 25th President of the United States
Location: Buffalo, New York, USA
Leon Frank Czolgosz (1873 – October 29, 1901) was the assassin of U.S. President William McKinley.
In the last few years of his life he was heavily influenced by anarchist writers such as Emma Goldman.
He became a recluse, and spent much of his time alone, reading socialist and anarchist newspapers.
However, Czolgosz, as far as is known, failed to be accepted into any anarchist group.
Then on July 29, 1900, King Umberto I was assassinated by avowed anarchist, Gaetano Bresci.
The assassination sent shockwaves through the American anarchist movement.
On August 31, 1901 he moved to Buffalo, New York and rented a room near the site of the Pan-American Exposition.
McKinley had been standing in a receiving line at the Temple of Music greeting the public for several minutes when Czolgosz reached the front of the line and shot McKinley twice at point-blank range at 4:07 p.m..
The pistol is currently on display at the Pan-American Exposition exhibit of the Erie County Historical Society in Buffalo.
The scene of the crime, the Temple of Music, was torn down in November 1901.
Leon Frank Czolgosz (May 5, 1873 – October 29, 1901; also used surname "Nieman" and variations thereof) was the assassin of U.S. President William McKinley.
In the last few years of his life, he claimed to have been heavily influenced by anarchists such as Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman.
He became a recluse and spent much of his time alone reading Socialist and anarchist newspapers while drinking milk in his mother's attic.
He only had enough time to explain to her about his disappointment in Cleveland's socialists, and for Goldman to introduce him to her anarchist friends who were at the train station.
Then he learned of a European crime which changed his life: On July 29, 1900, King Umberto I of Italy had been shot dead by anarchist Gaetano Bresci.
The assassination shocked and galvanized the American anarchist movement, and Czolgosz is thought to have consciously imitated Bresci.
On August 31, 1901, Czolgosz moved to Buffalo, New York.
There, he rented a room near the site of the Pan-American Exposition.
With the gun wrapped in a handkerchief in his pocket, Czolgosz approached McKinley's procession, the President having been standing in a receiving line inside of the Temple of Music, greeting the public for 10 minutes.
As a result, Lorin Lewis argued at the trial that Czolgosz could not be found guilty for the murder of the president because he was insane at the time (similar to the defense that was used in the Charles J. Guiteau trial back in 1881, after the shooting of President James A. Garfield).
The prosecutor laid great stress on Czolgosz's anarchist affiliations and called upon the jury to heed the popular demand for a quick trial and execution.
Other anarchists and radicals were unwilling to support Goldman's effort to aid Czolgosz, believing that he had harmed the movement.
The scene of the crime, the Temple of Music, was demolished in November 1901, along with the rest of the Exposition grounds.
Czolgosz's revolver is on display in the Pan-American Exposition exhibit at the Buffalo and Erie County Historical Society in Buffalo.
William McKinley assassination
The William McKinley assassination occurred on September 6, 1901, at the Temple of Music in Buffalo, New York.
United States President William McKinley, attending the Pan-American Exposition, was shot twice by Leon Czolgosz, an anarchist.
McKinley initially appeared to be recovering from his wounds, but took a turn for the worse six days after the shooting and died on September 14, 1901.
McKinley was the third of four presidents to be assassinated, following Abraham Lincoln in 1865 and James A. Garfield in 1881 and preceding John F. Kennedy in 1963.
His secretary, George B. Cortelyou, disliked such public receptions, believing them to be security risks.
McKinley, accompanied by Cortelyou and Exposition president John Milburn, arrived at the Exposition at 3:30 p.m. and proceeded to the Temple of Music building where the reception was to take place.
Waiting in that line was Leon Czolgosz.
In May 1901 he attended a speech given by famous anarchist Emma Goldman, in Cleveland, Ohio.
His secretary, George B. Cortelyou, disliked such public receptions, believing them to be security risks.
McKinley, accompanied by Cortelyou and Exposition president John Milburn, arrived at the Exposition at 3:30 p.m. and proceeded to the Temple of Music building where the reception was to take place.
Waiting in that line was the asassin, Leon Czolgosz.
William J. Gomph, the exposition's official organist, was softly playing Schumann's Träumerei on the massive organ that was a special attraction at the Temple of Music.
Some other anarchists and radicals were unwilling to help Goldman's effort to aid Czolgosz, believing that he had harmed the movement.
The McKinley Monument in Buffalo, New York, a 96-foot-tall obelisk in Niagara Square, was dedicated in 1907.
A stone marks the location of the Temple of Music where McKinley was shot.
The Temple of Music: A Novel.
The Life of William McKinley.
1873 	Leon Czolgosz born of Polish parents, Detroit.
6 May 1901 	Travels to Cleveland to see his anarchist hero, Emma Goldman, speak.
29 Jul 1901 	An Italian-American anarchist assassinates King Umberto I of Italy.
5 Sep 1901 	Sees McKinley speak at the Pan-American Exposition.
6 Sep 1901 	While shaking hands at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, President William McKinley is shot twice in the abdomen at point-blank range with a .32 caliber revolver.
The assassin, an anarchist by the name of Leon Frank Czolgosz, actually is a lone gunman (for once).
29 Oct 1901 	Leon Czolgosz electrocuted, 7:12 am, Auburn prison in New York.
It could have been, had Congress passed a bill to rename The Philippine Islands after the assassination of the 25th President of the United States, William McKinley.
McKinley assassinationOn September 6, 1901 President McKinley was holding a reception in the Temple of Music at the Pan-American Exposition held in Buffalo, New York.
Leon Czolgosz, an anarchist, was in the greeting line and he approached McKinley with hand wrapped up to his right wrist in a handkerchief.
Four Presidents’ have been shot to death: Abraham Lincoln (1865), James A. Garfield (1881), William McKinley (1901), and John F. Kennedy (1963).
It was definitely not a time to be labeled an “anarchist.”
In Manhattan on September 7, a well dressed young man riled up a crowd on 125th Street and Seventh Avenue to come with him to Paterson, NJ to “exterminate the anarchists.”
As the police looked on without interfering, over 100 people came with him as he boarded the elevated to go to Paterson “to kill 10,000 anarchists if President McKinley dies.”
Antonio Maggio a coronet player and anarchist had made a prediction the previous year while living in Kansas City, MO, that the President would be killed by anarchists.
On September 8, in Chicopee, KA, anarchists held jubilation meetings to give thanks for the shooting of McKinley.
Patriots invaded the meeting and several shots were fired at the anarchists.
On September 11 in Danbury, CT, suspected anarchist Albert Weber was dismissed from his job as a hatmaker at the factory of T.C. Millard and Co. when his co-workers refused to work with him.
In New York City on September 12 anarchist and editor of Die Freiheit, was arrested for an editorial he wrote on September 7.
On September 16, in Newark NJ, anarchist Victor Zagarsky was sentenced to 90 days in prison for toasting McKinley’s death and drinking to the health of Czolgosz.
Assassin Leon Czolgosz’s Trial Took Just Over 8 Hours
When Leon Czolgosz was buried in the Auburn prison cemetery where he was executed, the decision was made to have his body destroyed.
