Franco-Mongol alliance

, was one of the four khanates within the Mongol Empire.
Il-Khan means "subordinate Khan" and the dynasty was in theory under the authority of the Great Khan, although they lost contact with him.
His expedition towards Egypt, however, was halted in Palestine in 1260 by a major defeat at the Battle of Ain Jalut at the hands of the Mamluks of Egypt.
Hulagu conquered Muslim Syria, in alliance with Christian forces from Cilician Armenia, Georgia, and the Franks of the Principality of Antioch.
Franco-Mongol alliance
Many attempts towards the formation of a Franco-Mongol alliance were made between the courts of Western Europe and the Mongol Empire (primarily the Ilkhanate) in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, starting from around the time of the Seventh Crusade.
He also opposed alliances with the Christian Crusaders, and with Shi’a although his own Sultan was attempting to foster an alliance with the latter.
Tayymiyyah moved to Damascus in 1268, then under the Mamluks of Egypt who had halted the Mongol's advance east in 1260 when they won the Battle of Ain Jalut.
Between the eleventh to the fifteenth century, the Crusaders were usually called Franks.
"The term [Frank] was used by all the populations of the eastern Mediterranean to designate the totality of the Crusaders as well as the settlers."
"Despite numerous envoys and the obvious logic of an alliance against mutual enemies, the papacy and the Crusaders never achieved the often-proposed alliance against Islam."
Atwood, p. 583, "Western Europe and the Mongol Empire."
The Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire.
Prester John & The Franco-Mongol Alliance
Perhaps it’d be better if I explain this in reverse order: the Franco-Mongol Alliance (FMA) & Prester John.
In the 13th and 14th centuries (~7th Crusade or so), Muslims and Asians considered all Western Europeans as “Franks,” and the Western Europeans called those from the Ilkhanate in Persia as “Mongols” (in hindsight, the Europeans kind of win this one, as the Ilkhanate was a breakaway state of the great Mongol Empire and was ruled by the Mongol House of Hulagu, but that’s like saying Australians are British or something).
At first, communication between the two didn’t go so well when they started around 1220 CE.
Eventually, the Crusaders lost the Holy Lands, and the Ilkhanate dissolved into several warring states.
So, then…who’s this Prester John guy?
Prester John.
That Prester John.
Prester John’s son, King David of India, who had just conquered Muslim Persia, was setting his sights on pillaging Baghdad and restoring Jerusalem to its former glory.
But despite Genghis Khan’s immense, empire-destroying power and atrociousness, he was no match against Prester John.
He was continued to be seen as the son of Prester John, who then simply took on the carnal form of Genghis’s foster father.
Gradually, the kingdom of Prester John slowly moved from India into Central Asia as more Christian ambassadors explored the well-protected roads of the Mongol Empire.
And so…to come full circle, one of Genghis Khan’s many grandsons eventually grows up to become that “ally”-ignorant founder of the Ilkhanate, meaning he was the great-grandson of Prester John, which was a close enough famial relation to give the Franks hope to seek out a Franco-Mongol Alliance, which ended up never happening anyways.
Prester John: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prester_John
So what’s up with Prester John in Ethiopia?
Since the legend of Prester John started out with him ruling some obscure, vague notion of a land called “India,” Ethiopia was the perfect setting for him when actual India and Central Asia didn’t really pan out so well for possible locations after the collapse of the Mongol Empire.
This Ethiopian arc of the legend became so strong and widely accepted that when Emperor Zara Yaqob attended the Council of Florence in 1441, the Europeans kept calling him Prester John, utterly confusing the Ethiopian delegation as nowhere in the designated list of official regnal names for the Emperor was there a “Prester John.”
Mind you, this was more than 100 years after the dissolution of the Ilkhanate and 200 years after the death of the previous Prester John, Genghis Khan’s foster father.
Why didn't the Franco-Mongol alliance formalize in the 13th century?
Rabban Bar Sauma was born in Beijing around 1220, a Nestorian Christian, but possibly of Uyghur ethnic origin.
Around 1287, the Mongol Khan Arghun decided to attempt the formation of a Franco-Mongol alliance, and sent Rabban Bar Sauma and his student to Europe for negotiation.
When Rabban Bar Sauma arrived at his destination, he would have dicovered many other notables from the East already present, especially Nestorian Christians.
The legend of Prester John had already created a mindset for the Europeans to expect aid from Christians from Africa and Asia, and Arghun had already sent a Nestorian embassy several years before, including Isa Tarsah Kelemechi.
He was known for sending several embassies to Europe in an unsuccessful attempt to form a Franco-Mongol alliance against the muslims in the Holy Land.
During Arghun's reign, the Egyptian Mamluks continuously reinforced their power in Syria, and the Mamluk Sultan Qalawun re-captured Crusader territories, some of which, such as Tripoli, had been vassal states of the Turco-Mongols.
Arghun was one of a long line of Genghis-Khanite rulers who endeavoured to established a Franco-Mongol alliance with the Europeans, against their common enemies the Egyptian Mamluks.
But by the late 13th century, Western Europe was no longer as interested in the waning crusades, and Arghun's missions were ultimately fruitless.
We will chase the Saracens, with the help of the Lord, the Pope, and the Great Khan. "
Arghun committed to march his troops as soon as the Crusaders had disembarked at Saint-Jean-d'Acre.
Buscarello was also bearing a memorandum explaining that the Mongol ruler would prepare all necessary supplies for the Crusaders, as well as 30,000 horses.
The 13th century saw such a vogue of Mongol things in the West that many new-born children in Italy were named after Genghis-Khanite rulers, including Arghun: names such as Can Grande ("Great Khan"), Alaone (Hulagu), Argone (Arghun) or Cassano (Ghazan) are recorded with a high frequency.
Hulagu's army greatly expanded the southwestern portion of the Mongol Empire, founding the Ilkhanate of Persia, a precursor to the Safavid Dynasty and later to the modern state of Iran.
In 1264, after spending three years in Hulagu's realm, Marco Polo and his uncle set off along the Silk Road to the Court of the Great Khan.
Hulagu's brother Mongke had been installed as Great Khan in 1251.
After Baghdad, in 1260, Mongol forces combined with those of their Christian vassals in the region, such as the army of Cilician Armenia under Hetoum I, and the Franks of Bohemond VI of Antioch.
With the Islamic power center of Baghdad gone and Damascus weakened, the center of Islamic power transferred to the Egyptian Mamluks in Cairo.
However, Great Khan Mongke had died in late 1259, requiring Hulagu to return Karakorum to engage in the decision on who the next Great Khan would be.
The Crusaders, though traditional enemies of the Mamluks, also regarded the Mongols as the greater threat.
So instead, the Crusaders allowed the Egyptian forces to come north through Crusader territory, and resupply near the Crusaders' powerbase of Acre (Morgan 1986, 137).
Hulagu returned to his lands by 1262, after the succession was finally settled with his brother Kublai Khan established as Great Khan.
Hulagu sent multiple communications to Europe, in an attempt to establish a Franco-Mongol alliance against the Muslims.
Many new-born children in Italy were named after Mongol rulers, including Hulagu: names such as Can Grande ("Great Khan"), Alaone (Hulagu), Argone (Arghun) or Cassano (Ghazan) are recorded (Jackson 2005, 315).
They were invited by a envoy of Hulagu (right) to travel east to visit the Great Khan Kubilai.
Nicolò and Maffeo then joined up with an embassy sent by Hulagu to his brother, the Great Khan Kublai.
In 1266, the Polos reached the seat of the Great Khan in the Mongol capital Khanbaliq, present day Beijing, China.
One thing lead to another, as it often will on the nets, and I ended up reading about the 13th Century Franco-Mongol alliance attempts, which I had never heard about, and their connection to the legend of Prester John which has always intrigued me.
Regardless of whether I do ever complete my Iberian Ambassador to the Court of Prester John outfit or not, the realization of how this backstory would inform the design choices not just for this one outfit, but for any number of variations on it, was a revelation.
The Ilkhanate was one of the four khanates within the Mongol Empire.
His expedition towards Egypt, however, was halted in Palestine in 1260 by a major defeat at the Battle of Ain Jalut at the hands of the Mamluk Egyptians.
However, the Ilkhans remained opposed to the Mamluk Egyptians (who had defeated both Mongol invaders and both Early Crusaders and the Later Crusaders).
Many attempts were made towards forming a Franco-Mongol alliance between the mid-13th and early 14th centuries, starting around the time of the Seventh Crusade.
The Later Crusaders were open to the idea of assistance coming from the East, due to the long-running legend of a mythical Prester John, an Eastern king in a magical kingdom who many believed would arrive someday to help with the fight in the Holy Land.
The closest thing to actual Later Crusader cooperation with Mongol military actions was the overlord-subject relationship between the Mongols and the Later Crusader Principality of Antioch, and other Christian vassal states such as the included Georgians and Cilician Armenians.
In 1260 most of the Syrian States were briefly conquered by the joint efforts of the Mongols and the Cilician Armenians and Later Crusaders of Antioch.
However in the same year another Later Crusader state entered into a passive truce with the Mamluk Egyptians and stood aside as the Egyptian forces advanced northwards through Palestine allowing them to secure a major and historic success against the Mongols at 1260's pivotal Battle of Ain Jalut.
The Mongols again invaded Syria several times between 1281 and 1312, and sometimes attempted joint operations with the Europeans but ultimately both the Later Crusader Franks and the Mongols were ejected from Palestine by 1303, leading to the 1323 Mongol-Mamluk Egyptian Treaty of Aleppo which saw the Mongol stranglehold over their vassals the Sultanate of Rum and the Cilician Armenian kingdoms end.
Ilkhanid Mongol - Swords and Scimitars : 1230-1353, Mongols (and assimilated Turks, Persians and Cumans) in Iran, Azerbajan, Iraq messing with the Crusaders, Caliphates and Caucauses.
Mongol Empire
Mongol Empire
Location of Mongol Empire
Great Khan
The Mongol Empire ( Mongolian: ????????
By 1279, the Mongol Empire covered over 33,000,000 km² (12,741,000 sq mi), 22% of the Earth's total land area.
By the time of Kublai Khan's death, with no accepted Khagan in existence, the Mongol Empire became divided into four separate khanates.
Mongol Empire
Major events in the Early Mongol Empire
Mongol Empire in 1227 at Genghis' death
1229: Ogedei elected as Great Khan.
Major events in the Late Mongol Empire
1261: Two Great Khans in Mongol Empire: Kublai Khan and Ariq Boke.
1288: Failed third Mongol invasion of Vietnam ( Battle of Bach Dang (1288)), which made Annam and Champa tributary vassals of Mongol Empire.
The forces under the command of the Mongol Empire were generally trained, organized, and equipped for mobility and speed.
The Mongol Empire was governed by a code of law devised by Genghis, called Yassa, meaning "order" or "decree".
On the whole, the tight discipline made the Mongol Empire extremely safe and well-run; European travelers were amazed by the organization and strict discipline of the people within the Mongol Empire.
The empire was governed by a non-democratic parliamentary-style central assembly, called Kurultai, in which the Mongol chiefs met with the Great Khan to discuss domestic and foreign policies.
Some of the major Christian figures among the Mongols were: Sorghaghtani Beki, daughter in law of Genghis Khan, and mother of the Great Khans Möngke, Kublai, Hulagu and Ariq Boke; Sartaq, khan of Golden Horde; Doquz Khatun, the mother of the ruler Abaqa; Kitbuqa, general of Mongol forces in the Levant, who fought in alliance with Christians.
The 13th century saw attempts at a Franco-Mongol alliance with exchange of ambassadors and even military collaboration with European Christians in the Holy Land.
There were famous shamans in Mongol Empire such as Teb tengri and Khorchi.
The Mongol Empire had negligible influence on seaborne trade.
The Mongol Empire had an ingenious and efficient mail system for the time, often referred to by scholars as the Yam, which had lavishly furnished and well guarded relay posts known as örtöö set up all over the Mongol Empire.
Mongol invasion of Central Asia initially was composed of Genghis Khan's victory over and unification of the Mongol and Turkic central Asian confederations such as Merkits, Tartars, Mongols, Uighurs that eventually created the Mongol Empire.
The major battles were the Battle of Baghdad (1258), when the Mongols sacked the city which for 500 years had been the centre of Islamic power; and the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260, when the Muslim Egyptian Mamluks, with some unusual provisioning assistance from the Christian European Crusaders, were for the first time able to stop the Mongol advance at Ain Jalut, in the northern part of what is today known as the West Bank.
At first, the Mongol Empire was ruled by Ögedei Khan, Genghis Khan's third son and designated heir, but after his death in 1241, the fractures which would ultimately crack the Empire began to show.
Enmity between the grandchildren of Genghis Khan resulted in a five year regency by Ögedei's widow until she finally got her son Guyuk Khan confirmed as Great Khan.
The last universally accepted Great Khan was his brother Arigboh (aka.
Despite his recognition as Great Khan, he was unable to keep his brother Hulagu and their cousin Berke from open warfare in 1263, and after Kublai's death there was not an accepted Great Khan, so the Mongol Empire was fragmented for good.
Genghis Khan divided his realm into four Khanates, subdivisions of a single empire under the Great Khan ( Khan of Khans).
Empire of the Great Khan (China) - Kublai Khan
The Mongol Empire and its successor khanates
However news of Ögedei's death spared Western Europe as Batu had to turn his attentions to the election of the next Great Khan.
The Great Khan Möngke having died, however, he hastened to return for the election, and the force that remained in Palestine was destroyed by the Mamluks under Saif ad-Din Qutuz in 1261 at Ayn Jalut.
The Mongol Empire included China, most of Russia, Siberia, parts of Burma, and all of Georgia, Armenia, Cilicia, Anatolia, Iraq, Persia, Central Asia, Ukraine and Belarus.
Both evaded the conquest because of the death of a Great Khan.
Batu Khan had made his Russian conquests safe for the next 10 generations, and when the Great Khan died, he rushed back to Mongolia to put in his claim for power.
That is why the two states of Vietnam are considered vassals of the Mongol Empire.
The Mamluks successfully defended the Holy Land with the aid of Berke Khan who allied himself with them after his cousin enraged him by sacking Baghdad, (Berke was a Muslim, and sent word to the Great Khan that he would "call him to account ( Hulagu Khan), for he has murdered the Caliph in Baghdad, and killed all the faithful.")
This Mongol against Mongol fighting, after the Mamluks defeated the Mongols at Ain Jalut in 1260 ultimately brought down the Mongol Empire.
And then it took months more for the kurultai to come to the decision that had been almost inevitable from the start — that Genghis's choice as successor, his third son Ögedei, should become Great Khan.
This sudden vacuum of power is seen as the beginning of the events that led to the decline of the Mongol Empire.
Batu, bitterly disappointed by the postponement of the European campaign, was unwilling to accept Guyuk as Great Khan, but lacked the influence in the kurultai to procure his own election.
In 1246 Batu eventually agreed to send a representative to the kurultai but never acknowledged the resulting election of Guyuk as Great Khan.
Batu remained in the west but this time gave his support to his and Guyuk's cousin, Möngke, who was duly elected Great Khan in 1251.
Kublai expanded the Mongol Empire and became a favorite of Möngke.
After his older brother's death, Kublai placed himself in the running for a new khan against his younger brother, and, although his younger brother won the election, Kublai defeated him in battle, and Kublai became the last Great Khan.
Note, among historians there is no consensus who was the last true Great Khan.
Of the Ilkhanate, their ruler Ilkhan Ghazan was converted to Islam in 1295 and renounced all allegiance to the Great Khan.
The Mongol Empire was never again under one rule, though the other three khanates negotiated peace with Temür Khan of Yuan Dynasty and acknowledged him as their nominal overlord in 1304, in order to maintain trade and diplomatic relations.
The 13th century saw a Franco-Mongol alliance with exchange of ambassadors and even military collaboration in the Holy Land.
The disintegration of the Mongol Empire led to the collapse of the Silk Road's political unity.
After the Mongol Empire, the great political powers along the Silk Road became economically and culturally separated.
Whereas along the Silk Road, it was quite the opposite: failure to maintain the level of integration of the Mongol Empire and decline in trade, partly due to European maritime trade.
The Mongol Empire was the largest contiguous empire in human history.
Between 1220 and 1260, the total population of Persia may have dropped from 2,500,000 to 250,000 as a result of mass extermination and famine.
Non-military achievements of the Mongol Empire include the introduction of a writing system, based on the Uyghur script, that is still used in Inner Mongolia.
Some of the long-term consequences of the Mongol Empire include:
The Yuan Dynasty (the part of Mongol Empire in China) is traditionally given credit for reuniting China and expanding its frontiers.
Some research studies indicate that the Black Death, which devastated Europe in the late 1340s, may have reached from China to Europe along the trade routes of the Mongol Empire.
Among the Western accounts, R. J. Rummel estimated that 30 million people were killed under the rule of the Mongol Empire.
Genghis Khan, founder of the Mongol Empire and Mongol Nation.
The Mongol Empire had a lasting impact, unifying large regions, some of which (such as eastern and western Russia and the western parts of China) remain unified today, albeit under different rulership.
The influence of the Mongol Empire may prove to be even more direct — Zerjal et al [2003] identify a Y-chromosomal lineage present in about 8% of the men in a large region of Asia (or about 0.5% of the men in the world).
Battle of Ain Jalut
Battle of Ain Jalut
Campaign of the Battle of Ain Jalut 1260.
Mameluke Flag.svg Mamluk Sultanate 	Mongol Empire
Rubenid Flag.svg Cilician Armenia
Light cavalry and horse archers, heavy cavalry, infantry, hand cannoneers 	Mongol lancers and horse archers, 500 Cilician Armenian troops, Georgian contingent, local Ayyubid contingents
The Battle of Ain Jalut (Ayn Jalut, in Arabic: ???
took place on 3 September 1260 between Muslim Mamluks and the Mongols in the southeastern Galilee, in the Jezreel Valley, not far from the site of Zir'in.
When Möngke Khan became Great Khan in 1251, he immediately set out to implement his grandfather Genghis Khan's plan for world empire.
By the time that the Mongols reached Baghdad, their army included Cilician Armenians, and even some Frankish forces from the submissive Principality of Antioch.
From the King of Kings of the East and West, the Great Khan.
The power dynamic then changed due to the death of the Great Khan Mongke (while on an expedition to China), requiring Hulagu and other senior Mongols to return home to decide upon his successor.
A potential Great Khan, Hulagu took the majority of his army with him, and left a much smaller force west of the Euphrates of only around one or two tumens (10,000–20,000 men, the size of a modern military division) under his best general, the Nestorian Christian Naiman Kitbuqa Noyan.
The Mongols, for their part, attempted to form a Franco-Mongol alliance with (or at least, demand the submission of) the remnant of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, now centered on Acre, but Pope Alexander IV had forbidden this.
Though the Mamluks were the traditional enemies of the Franks, the Barons of Acre recognized the Mongols as the more immediate menace, and so the Crusaders opted for a position of cautious neutrality between the two forces.
[9] In an unusual move, they agreed that the Egyptian Mamluks could march north through the Crusader territories unmolested, and even camp to resupply near Acre.
The Battle of Ain Jalut is also notable for being the earliest known battle where explosive hand cannons (midfa in Arabic) were used.
After the Mongol succession was finally settled, with Kublai as the last Great Khan, Hulagu returned to his lands by 1262, and massed his armies to attack the Mamluks and avenge Ain Jalut.
Battle of Ain Jalut in fiction
Robert Shea's historical novel The Saracen deals extensively with the Battle of Ain Jalut and the subsequent assassination of Sultan Qutuz.
Several attempts at a Franco-Mongol alliance against the Islamic caliphates, their common enemy, were made by various leaders among the Frankish Crusaders and the Mongol Empire
The Crusaders returned the favor by called all Muslims "Saracens" regardless of whether they were Arabs, Turks or anything else.
The Crusaders were right there, much closer than France.
There were plenty of steppe tribes/individuals before and during the Mongol Empire which were Christian, incidentally- mostly Nestorians, as the Church of the East was the only one which would evangelise so far out.
The Crusaders had been defeated and Jerusalem liberated in 1187, the Ismaili Fatimids had finally been removed from harassing the Muslim world in the mid-1100s, and a powerful Khwarazmian Empire had emerged in Persia.
By the 1220s, Genghis Khan’s armies had ravaged much of Asia and even Europe.
It would, he assured the Mongols, be a cakewalk and within a short space of time the Mongol Empire could be extended into the previously impervious core of the Muslim Caliphate.
The Crusaders and the Armenians also attacked in northern Syria diverting some of the Turkish contingents that might have been available for the defense of Baghdad.
In 1260 Mongol forces combined with those of their Christian vassals in the region, including the army of Cilician Armenia under Hetoum I and the Franks of Bohemond VI of Antioch.
With the Islamic power center of Baghdad gone and Damascus weakened, the center of Islamic power transferred to the Egyptian Mamluks in Cairo.
Like his brother Batu, he was loyal to the Great Khan Mongke during this time.
Regardless of Berke's affiliation with Islam, Hulagu added Iraq to the Mongol Empire in the cruelest of manners and advanced towards Syria and Mamluk Sultanate to begin a war of attrition against the Mamluk Sultanate.
The Mongols, for their part, attempted to form a Franco-Mongol alliance with (or at least, demand the submission of) the remnant of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, now centered on Acre, but Pope Alexander IV had forbidden this.
Instead of taking sides, the Crusaders opted for a position of cautious neutrality between the two forces.
In an unusual move, however, they agreed that the Egyptian Mamluks could march north through the Crusader territories unmolested and even camp to resupply near Acre.
This situation resulted in recalling Hulagu back to Mangolia, as an heir and potential Great Khan, to Mongolia in order to elect a new Khan.
After the issue of succession was settled and Hulagu's brother Kublai Khan was established as Great Khan, Hulagu returned to his lands by 1262.
Hulagu sent multiple communications to Europe in an attempt to establish a Franco-Mongol alliance against the Muslims.
Berke was responsible for the first official establishment of Islam in a khanate of the Mongol Empire.
1249 : Damietta is taken by the Crusaders.
The Crusaders must choose between Alexandria and Cairo as the next target.
The ardent Robert of Artois, another brother of the king, will convince the Crusaders to sail up the Nile Delta instead of attacking Alexandria.
Indeed, control of Egypt has a significant strategic interest for the Crusaders .
On February 26, the Crusaders take Al Mansurah.
The Crusaders seize Cairo a month later.
Then, Robert of Artois easily seized Alexandria with a few templars, allowing the Crusaders to take control of the Nile Delta.
The Crusaders enter into an alliance with the Ilkhanate.
The Mamluks are defeated by the Mongols and the Crusaders and Baybars is killed.
Michael Palaiologos decides not to take Constantinople in order to avoid a war against the Crusaders States.
The Armenian kingdom of Cilicia is not invalded by the Mamluks in 1266 and Hethum I does not abdicate in 1270.
Also, just a tad too wanky for the Crusaders.
Also, just a tad too wanky for the Crusaders.
The Latin Crusaders were traditionally tolerate of the native non-Latin Christians in the Kingdom of Jerusalem too.
The Latin Crusaders were traditionally tolerate of the native non-Latin Christians in the Kingdom of Jerusalem too.
The Crusaders would take advantage of the conflict between the Ayyubid and the Mamluks (which lasted until 1255 in OTL).
In OTL they were several attempts at a Franco-Mongol alliance against the Islamic caliphates.
In OTL the crusaders agreed to allow the Egyptian Mamluks to cross their territory to fight the Mongols.
QUESTION -- does the above suggest any kind of (loose) coordination-of-action, between Christians, and their Mongol allies, in the mid-13th century AD ?
Franco-Mongol alliance - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Another centuries later still, Mongols & Christian Crusaders attacked Russia again:
Franco-Mongol alliance - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
It worked the other way around as well, I seem to remember the Crusaders allowing a lorge Muslim army from Egypt pass unmolested through their territory to defeat the Mongols in Iraq.
Please elaborate on this if you know more (dates and which crusade was taking place at the time + combatants) I have been told that if the Crusaders had jioned forces with the Mongols and attacked the Muslim army then there was a good chance that the entire Islamic faith would crumble.
Franco-Mongol alliance
Many attempts were made towards forming a Franco-Mongol alliance between the mid-13th and early 14th centuries, starting around the time of the Seventh Crusade.
[1] Historians note that in hindsight an alliance between the Mongols and the "Franks" (European Crusaders) often appears a logical choice.
[1][2][3] The Mongols were already very sympathetic to Christianity as many Mongols were Nestorian Christians.
The Europeans were open to the idea of assistance coming from the East, due to the long-running legend of a mythical Prester John, an Eastern king in a magical kingdom who many believed would arrive someday to help with the fight in the Holy Land.
[6][7][8][9][10] Other Christian vassal states included Georgia, and Cilician Armenia.
[13] However, that same year there were other Christians, the Franks of Acre, who entered into a passive truce with the other side, the Egyptian Mamluks.
This unusual neutrality on the part of the Franks allowed the Muslim Egyptians to advance northwards through Palestine, to obtain a major and historic success against the Mongols at 1260's pivotal Battle of Ain Jalut.
Ultimately, the attempts at alliance bore little fruit, and ended with the victory of the Egyptian Mamluks, the total eviction of both the Franks and the Mongols from Palestine by 1303, and a treaty of peace between the Mongols and the Mamluks in 1323, the Treaty of Aleppo.
The Silk Road gave rise to the clusters of military states of nomadic origins in North China, invited the Nestorian, Manichaean, Buddhist, and later Islamic religions into Central Asia and China, created the influential Khazar Federation and at the end of its glory, brought about the largest continental empire ever: the Mongol Empire, with its political centers strung along the Silk Road (Beijing in North China, Karakorum in central Mongolia, Sarmakhand in Transoxiana, Tabriz in Northern Iran, Sarai and Astrakhan in lower Volga, Solkhat in Crimea, Kazan in Central Russia, Erzurum in eastern Anatolia), realizing the political unification of zones previously loosely and intermittently connected by material and cultural goods.
The Mongol Empire and its sphere of influence (to include vassal states such as Goryeo at its height.
The 13th century also saw attempts at a Franco-Mongol alliance, with exchange of ambassadors and (failed) attempts at military collaboration in the Holy Land during the later Crusades, though eventually the Mongols in the Ilkhanate, after they had destroyed the Abbasid and Ayyubid dynasties, eventually themselves converted to Islam, and signed the 1323 Treaty of Aleppo with the surviving Muslim power, the Egyptian Mamluks.
Georgia (and Armenia) in the aftermath of the Mongol invasion (1220 - 1245).
Mongol Armenia or Ilkhanid Armenia refers to the period in which both Armenia (during its union with the Kingdom of Georgia) and the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia became tributary and vassal to the Mongol Empire (the later Ilkhanate) in the 1230s.
Armenians were therefore very friendly to the European Crusaders who began to arrive in the early 12th century.
Christian Georgia was repeatedly attacked starting in 1220,[2] and in 1243 Queen Rusudan formally submitted to the Mongols, turning Georgia into a vassal state which then became a regular ally in the Mongol military conquests.
When the Mongols reached the Caucasus, they conquered Greater Armenia, and various of the Armenian barons opted to swear loyalty to the Mongol Empire.
In the 1240s, as the Mongols continued their advance towards Cilicia, King Hethum I chose to follow the example of the Greater Armenian barons such as Hasan Jalal,[8] and also submitted to the Ilkhanate.
To formalize his own relationship with the Mongols, in 1247 Hethum I sent his elder half-brother Sempad the Constable to the Mongol court in Karakorum.
On February 7, 1248, he sent a letter from Samarkand to his brother-in-law Henry I, king of Cyprus (who was married to the Armenian princess Stephanie, Sempad and Hethum I's sister).
During his visit to the Mongol court, Sempad received a relative of the Great Khan as a bride.
Military collaboration between the Armenians and the Mongols began in 1258-1260, when Hethum I, Bohemond VI, and the Georgians combined forces with the Mongols under Hulagu in the Mongol invasion of Syria and Mesopotamia.
The Mongol expansion into the Middle East was stopped in 1260, when the Franks in Acre struck a passive alliance with the Egyptian Mamluks, allowing the Muslim Mamluks to achieve a decisive victory against the Mongols at the pivotal Battle of Ain Jalut, a battle in which 500 knights from Armenia may have participated, fighting on the side of the Mongols.
Following Ain Jalut, the remainder of the Mongol army retreated to Cilician Armenia under the commander Ilka, to be re-equipped by Hethum I. Hulagu then attempted a counter-attack which briefly occupied Aleppo, but it was repelled by the princes of Hama and Homs, subjects to the Sultan.
Following the death of the Mongol leader Hulagu in 1265, Baibars again threatened Cilician Armenia from Egypt.
In 1266, Baibars summoned Hethum I to abandon his allegiance to the Mongols, to accept Mamluk suzerainty, and remit to the Mamluks the territories and fortresses Hethum had acquired through his submission to the Mongols.
Following these threats, Hethum I again went to the Mongol court of the Il-Khan to obtain military support.
In 1269, Hethum I abdicated in favour of his son Leo II, who was forced to pay large annual tributes to the Mamluks.
Archbishop John of Cilician Armenia, in a painting from 1287.
In 1284, the Dominican Burchard of Mount Sion visited Cilician Armenia and left an account of his travel there.
In 1293, during the reign of the Ilkhan Gaykhatu, Hethum II, Hethum I's grandson, was king.
Cilician Armenia was attacked by the Mamluks and since the Mongols were unable to assist, a considerable amount of territory was lost in the eastern part of the country.
Hethum II then abandoned his throne to enter a Franciscan convent under the name John (an apparent homage to John of Monte Corvino),[51] leaving official rule to his brother Thoros for two years, before Hethum regained the throne.
With the rise of the Mongol Ilkhan Ghazan in 1295, Hethum II was able to again reinforce relations with the Mongols.
[52] He retained however a strong enmity towards the Egyptian Mamluks, and along with his Armeno-Mongol relations, he also attempted to coordinate actions with the Franks of Cyprus.
In 1296, Hethum II visited Constantinople to reinforce contacts there as well, giving his sister Rita in marriage to Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos.
[51][54] In 1298, Hethum II would again regain the throne, and continued relations with the Mongols.
In 1297, Ghazan resumed offensives against the Mamluks and tried to revive the attempts at a Franco-Mongol alliance.
[55] The plan was to combine the forces of the Christian military orders, the King of Cyprus, the aristocracy of Cyprus and Cilician Armenia, and the Mongols of the Ilkhanate.
In the summer of 1299, due to impending invasion from the Egyptian Mamluks, King Hethum II sent a message to Ghazan to obtain his support.
[65] In 1304, the Egyptian Mamluks continued their assault on Cilician Armenia, and succeeded in taking back all the lands which the Armenians had acquired during the Mongol invasion.
Until its final fall in 1375, Cilician Armenia received a succession of attacks from the Mamluks, with only few successes, such as the Battle of Ayas in 1305.
Hethum I (seated) in the Mongol court of Karakorum, "receiving the homage of the Mongols".
In 1307, Hethum II and Leon III were assassinated with their retinue by the Mongol general of Cilicia,[67] Bilarghu,[68] following an internal plot against Hethum's efforts to unite the Armenian Church with Rome.
Last Mongol intervention in Cilician Armenia (1322)
In 1320, the Egyptian sultan Naser Mohammed ibn Kelaoun invaded and ravaged Cilician Armenia.
Relations with the Mongols would essentially disappear after 1320, while relations with the Franks were reinforced, with the establishment of the French Lusignan dynasty as the ruling family in Cilician Armenia, due to the policy since 1254 of inter-marriage between the royal families of Cyprus and Cilician Armenia.
