Amundsen's South Pole expedition

The first venture to the South Pole was led by Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen.
Switching his sights to the Antarctic, he and his crew departed from Oslo on June 3, 1910 on their ship Fram.
After a first failed attempt to make their way inland, they embarked for the South Pole again in October of 1911, finally reaching their destination on Dec. 14, 1911, just about five weeks ahead of a British team led by Robert F. Scott.
Both Roald Amundsen (leading his South Pole expedition) and Robert Falcon Scott (leading the Terra Nova Expedition) reached the South Pole within a month of each other.
[6] Amundsen's expedition did conduct geographical work under Kristian Prestrud who conducted an expedition to King Edward VII Land while Amundsen was undertaking his attempt at the Pole.
During the depot laying in February 1911, Roald Amundsen had his first (and last) 180 miles of his route marked like a Norwegian ski course using marker flags initially every eight miles.
Roald Amundsen - Norwegian Antarctic Expedition, South Pole, 1910 - 1912
Roald Amundsen was the first man to lead a successful expedition to the South Pole.
Roald Amundsen, 1872-1928
Roald Amundsen, Olav Olavson Bjaaland, Hilmer Hanssen, Sverre H. Hassel and Oscar Wisting by their South Pole marker tent and flag
Roald Amundsen and his dog team at the South Pole
Roald Amundsen began a career studying medicine at the University of Christiana (now the University of Oslo), but dropped out in order to go to sea.
The next major expedition was to be to drift over the North pole with the pack ice in the ship Fram built for fellow Norwegian explorer Nansen (regarded as being the father of polar travel - North and South).
Roald Amundsen
A team led by legendary Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen was the first to reach the South Pole, in December 1911.
On December 14, 1911, Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen became the first person to reach the South Pole.
Amundsen and his team arrived at the pole five weeks ahead of their rival, British explorer Robert Falcon Scott.
When Roald Amundsen, on December 14th 1911, stood victorious at the South Pole.
Roald Amundsen´s home Uranienborg
Roald Amundsen´s home "Uranienborg" in Oppegård is picturesquely situated among ancient trees with a view of the Bunnefjord in Svartskog.
But at the age of 21, when both his parents had died, Roald Amundsen sold his medical textbooks, packed away the cranium he had studied and announced his intention of becoming a polar explorer.
It was widely known that the Englishman Robert Falcon Scott was working on his second attempt to reach the South Pole, and Amundsen - with his driving ambition to be first - resolved to get there before him.
All this changed when the bottomless crevasses and endless ice ridges of the Axel Heiberg Glacier posed a formidable barrier, which taxed all the strength and courage of the well-trained men.
Roald Amundsen left Spitsbergen on board the airship "Norge" only days after Byrd´s plane had winged northwards.
It only became a race to the pole when Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen entered the fray at a late stage.
This map shows the outward and return journeys to the South Pole made by Robert Falcon Scott and his team in 1911-1912.
The British party arrived in Antarctica in January 1911, and set up camp on Ross Island in McMurdo Sound.
This second map compares the routes taken to the Pole by Scott and the Norwegian expedition led by Roald Amundsen.
Amundsen pioneered a new route to the Pole across the Axel Heiberg Glacier, arriving on 14 December 1911.
This was 33 days before the British party.
Roald Amundsen
Well Norwegian explorer Roald Engebreth Gravning Amundsen not only survived year-long stays on Antarctica in the early 20th-century – he did it twice.
Naturally, this horrific experience stuck in a frozen wasteland with no escape and no hope of rescue only got Roald Amundsen pumped up to go out and do it all over again a year later.
Four years after returning from the Northwest Passage Expedition, Roald Amundsen loaded up Nansen's old boat Fram with nine hand-selected men, 97 Siberian Huskies, 10 tons of supplies, and set out on the four-month voyage to Antarctica's Ross Ice Shelf.
On October 18th, 1911, Roald Amundsen departed Framheim with five men, three sledges, and 52 sled dogs on his charge towards the South Pole.
On skis, sleds, and foot, the daring men of Roald Amundsen's expedition pushed on, fighting the elements, pushing their bodies to the limits of human endurance in the most inhospitable terrain on the planet.
It would be the first Trans-Arctic flight of any kind made while traversing the North Pole, and Roald Amundsen would become the first person on earth to ever cross over both the North and South Poles.
Roald Amundsen, one of the greatest heroes of the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration, died in 1928, when he was flying a rescue mission to save the crew of a downed blimp and his plane crashed into the Arctic Ocean.
In one of the most exciting and tragic races of the twentieth century, Amundsen beat his British rival Robert Falcon Scott’s expedition to the landmark by over a month, Scott not arriving until 18th January 1912.
The dogs were much better at working through the snow, meaning the team were able to progress swiftly and with comparatively little drama over the Axel Heiberg glacier and through the polar plateau.
Such, in fact, proved to be the case, but it came to a Norwegian expedition, led by the ascetic Roald Amundsen.
The race ended on 14 December 1911, when Amundsen and four others arrived at the South Pole after a generally uneventful and carefully managed overland journey.
After arriving at the South Pole on December 14, 1911, explorer Roald Amundsen (left) spent three days there with his companions: Oscar Wisting, Sverre Hassel, Helmer Hanssen and Olav Bjaaland (the photographer, not pictured).
On December 14, 1911, Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen and his four-man team became the first people to reach the South Pole, where they raised the Norwegian flag in victory.
Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen became the first man to reach the South Pole on December 14, 1911
Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen became the first man to reach the South Pole on December 14, 1911.
“Roald Amundsen and Robert Scott and their men went to extraordinary lengths to accomplish their goals.
Norwegian Roald Amundsen becomes the first explorer to reach the South Pole, beating his British rival, Robert Falcon Scott.
On 14 December 1911, Amundsen's expedition won the race to the Pole and returned safely to base camp in late January.
Robert Falcon Scott set off from Wales on July 15, 1910 on what was originally intended to be a primarily scientific expedition, but which quickly morphed into a quest to make history on behalf of the British Empire.
Meanwhile, Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen, whose plan to reach the North Pole first had been thwarted by both Frederik Cook and Robert Peary, had secretly turned his sights on the South Pole.
Above, Robert Falcon Scott, known as “Con,” writes in his journal in 1911 in the pre-fabricated wooden hut his team assembled at the base camp in Cape Evans, Antarctica.
Roald Amundsen (left) and Robert F. Scott (right) on skis in Antarctica during their expeditions to the South Pole.
Above: Expedition members Edward A. Wilson, Robert F. Scott, Edgar Evans, Lawrence Oates, and Henry Robertson Bowers in front of Roald Amundsen’s ”Polheim” tent.
Below: Capt. L. E.G. Oates, Lt. H. R. Bowers, Capt. Robert Falcon Scott, Dr. E. A. Wilson, and Chief Petty Officer Taff Evans.
A competitor – Roald Amundsen
The Norwegian explorer Amundsen was also heading there.
- Roald Amundsen diary, 14 December, 1911
Roald Amundsen and his men at the South Pole
- Robert Falcon Scott, diary January 1912
Amundsen dismissed Johansen from the trek for criticizing his leadership and ordered him to accompany the recovering Prestrud and the carpenter Jørgen Stubberud on a subsidiary mission to explore King Edward VII Land.
He participated in the eastern party sent to explore King Edward VII Land.
Norwegian Roald Amundsen becomes the first explorer to reach the South Pole, beating his British rival, Robert Falcon Scott.
This plateau was first sighted in 1903 during the Discovery Expedition to the Antarctic, which was led by Robert Falcon Scott.
In December 1911, while returning from the first journey to the South Pole, the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen decided to name this plateau the Haakon VII Plateau in honor of the newly elected King Haakon VII of Norway.
Roald Amundsen
Roald Amundsen piloting his ship
Roald Amundsen (1872 - 1928) was an explorer of the North and South Poles.
On December 14, 1911 Roald Amundsen planted the Norwegian Flag at the South Pole.
Fun Facts about Roald Amundsen
Roald Amundsen Reaches South Pole
Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen was the first person to reach the South Pole, on 14 December 1911.
He led the first expedition to reach the geographic South Pole five weeks ahead of a British party led by Robert Falcon Scott.
On 14 December 1911 the expedition team arrived at the Pole and returned safely to base camp in late January.
Roald Amundsen
Roald Amundsen, born in 1872 near Oslo, Norway, left his mark on the Heroic Era as one of the most successful polar explorers ever born.
Amundsen would lead one party to the Pole while Prestrud--with Johansen--would lead a second party to explore King Edward VII Land.
On November 17 they started the climb up the Axel Heiberg Glacier.
