Burning of Parliament

I think that's because the new Palace of Westminster, the new Houses of Parliament built in its place by Barry and Pugin from the 1840s through to the 1860s onwards, has become so famous as an icon of London - of Britain, indeed - the world over, that really it has obliterated from our memories what was there before.
So to start off with I'm going to give you a guided tour around the old Palace of Westminster.
But the old Palace of Westminster was situated probably only half way along this enormous western frontage here.
The Palace of Westminster was not simply the main residence for the Monarch from the Middle Ages onwards - it was also both the seat of Government and of the Law.
They piled the wood into the furnaces, the intense heat has melted the copper lining of the brick flues and started to cause a chimney fire and that's why there's the smoke and that's why there's this heat coming up through the floor.
Books about the new Palace of Westminster perhaps devoted a paragraph to the old Palace and a sentence about the fire - nothing else.
When an awesome fire ripped through the Palace of Westminster on 16 October of that year, a gleeful crowd whooped and cheered as fire burned the vast majority of the building to the ground.
Vast quantities of old wooden tally sticks had been used by the Exchequer to record how much tax was owed by subjects of the Crown.
And so it remains, alongside the rest of the gothic Palace of Westminster that we know today.
BBC Parliament marks the 175th anniversary of the burning down of the Palace of Westminster, with a special programme "The Great Fire: Burning Down the House - on BBC Parliament, Saturday 17 October at 2030 BST.
Palace of Westminster London
The Palace of Westminster London is often referred to as the Houses of Parliament where the Houses of Lords and Commons for the British government meet.
The Palace of Westminster occupies 873 ft. of Thames River front.
The rebuilt Old Palace became the Palace of Westminster meeting place for the Houses of Parliament.
Another great fire in 1834 burned down most of the Palace of Westminster beyond repair.
The Houses of Parliament were set alight when obsolete wooden tally sticks used to record tax collections for 700 years in England were disposed of by burning at the Palace.
The order was given to burn the tally sticks in the furnaces of the Palace of Westminster.
Author Charles Dickens commented that the bundles of tally sticks no longer in use could have been easily disposed of by offering the wooden sticks freely to the poor residents of the area for use as firewood.
Westminster Hall in the Palace of Westminster, London.
Palace of Westminster
A design competition for rebuilding the Palace of Westminster after the 1834 fire was won by architect Charles Barry in 1836.
The Palace of Westminster held its official State Opening ceremony February 3, 1852.
The death of the two leading architects and years of cost overruns meant 30 years passed before the new Palace of Westminster was completed.
The long sides of the Palace of Westminster face the river and the streets with barriers keeping tourists away from the side of the building.
Central Tower over Central Lobby is one of three main towers for the Palace of Westminster.
Much of the original stone quarried for the Palace of Westminster in the 1840s needed to be replaced as it deteriorated quickly in the pollution of 19th century London.
The Palace of Westminster will be undergoing major reconstruction work to update many areas that are still primarily parts of the original 1840s construction.
Charles Barry, officially recognized as architect of the Palace of Westminster, apparently omitted Augustus Pugin’s name as one of the chief designers for the Palace of Westminster.
Big Ben is the common name used for the tower, clock and bell of Elizabeth Tower at Palace of Westminster, London.
Charles Barry added a clock tower to his Palace of Westminster design in 1836.
Caroline Shenton, of the Parliamentary Archives at Westminster and author of 'The Day Parliament Burned Down' describes the dramatic events in Westminster on 16 October 1834.
By the late Georgian period, the buildings of the Palace of Westminster had become an accident waiting to happen.
The long-overdue catastrophe finally occurred on 16 October 1834.
Throughout the day, a chimney fire had smouldered under the floor of the House of Lords chamber, caused by the unsupervised and ill-advised burning of two large cartloads of wooden tally sticks (a form of medieval tax receipt created by the Exchequer, a government office based at Westminster) in the heating furnaces below.
For more on the rebuilding work, see 'The New Palace of Westminster'.
16 October 1834: Two Irishmen burn both the House of Lords and the House of Commons to the ground.
As the artist J M W Turner was strolling along the south bank of the River Thames on 16 October 1834 he saw flames erupting from the Houses of Parliament.
Instead of being burnt safely inside two furnaces in the basement, they set fire to the chimney which ran up through the ancient building, and the flames then spread rapidly throughout the royal palace.
#ArtePerLArte @PatriziaRametta • WILLIAM TURNER • The Burning of the Houses of Parliament - 16 October 1834 •
One hundred and seventy-nine years ago today, on October 16, 1834, the great Palace of Westminster in London, seat of the British Parliament, burned in a catastrophic and tragic fire.
Perhaps somewhere deep underground beneath the Palace of Westminster, somebody will find a charred, half-burned piece of wood with some tally marks on it.
The image of the modern Palace of Westminster is by Wikimedia Commons user Alvesgaspar, used and relicensed under GNU Free Documentation License.
She is its ideal chronicler because she is Clerk of the Records at the Parliamentary Archives, an expert on the Old Palace of Westminster which was replaced by the iconic building we now know.
Because someone had the bright idea of using the heating furnaces, whose flues ran under the House of Lords, to burn the wood tallies, the primitive accounting system of the Exchequer.
For over 100 years, the subject of J.M.W. Turner's "The Burning of the Houses of Parliament," a series of nine watercolors, has been identified as the October 1834 fire that burned down London's old Palace of Westminster, home of the British parliament.
When the Houses of Parliament were destroyed by fire in 1834, William IV actually offered the new Buckingham Palace as a ready-made replacement (Parliament declined).
Alternative titles: Palace of Westminster; Westminster Palace
Houses of Parliament, also called Palace of Westminster, in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the seat of the bicameral Parliament, including the House of Commons and the House of Lords.
