Convention of 1833

58 delegates assembled in San Felipe on October 1, 1832 Stephen F. Austin was elected president of the convention Things they wanted: Texas to become a separate Mexican state Immigration from the U.S. be allowed Exemption from certain customs duties Improved educational facilities Better protection from Native Americans Land titles for settlers in East Texas
Sam Houston attended the Convention of 1833.
Stephen F. Austin chosen to deliver the resolutions and constitution to Mexico City.
San Felipe de Austin History
San Felipe de Austin was founded in 1824 by Stephen F. Austin as the unofficial capital of his colony.
Regular mail service in the colony was inaugurated in 1826 when Samuel May Williams was appointed postmaster in San Felipe de Austin.
Gail Borden’s Telegraph and Texas Register, which became the unofficial journal of the revolution, was first published in San Felipe de Austin on October 10, 1835.
Many significant figures in early Texas history resided temporarily at San Felipe de Austin or visited periodically on business.
Several large cotton plantations were established in the bottomlands near the town during the 1820s, and from the outset, San Felipe de Austin became a trading center for the staple.
By the eve of the Texas Revolution, San Felipe de Austin ranked second only to San Antonio as a commercial center.
In view of the significance of the capital in the life of the colony, it was inevitable that San Felipe de Austin should play an important role in the events of the Texas Revolution.
The conventions of 1832 and 1833 were held in the town, and as the site of the Consultation of November 3, 1835, San Felipe de Austin served as the capital of the provisional government until the Convention of 1836 met the following March at Washington-on-the-Brazos.
After the fall of the Alamo, Gen. Sam Houston's army retreated through San Felipe de Austin.
The colonial capital was burned in the spring of 1836 during the Runaway Scrape as Sam Houston’s volunteer forces moved eastward to ultimate victory at San Jacinto.
Stephen F. Austin’s log cabin home was located near the Plaza de Commercio and was eventually renovated and leased to serve as the Whitesides Hotel.
Austin embraced the challenges of establishing an Anglo colony in Mexican Texas, becoming fluent in Spanish and utilizing the Spanish version of his name, Estevan.
Local residents established the commemorative site in 1928 and have annually held a celebration honoring Stephen F. Austin and early San Felipe ever since.
John Bricker entered the annals of Texas history as the only Texian casualty in the brief battle across the Brazos River at San Felipe de Austin, when Mexican troops engaged the Texians in April 1836.
Gail Borden, of Borden Milk, was a land agent for Stephen F. Austin, a newspaper publisher at San Felipe de Austin and the manager of printing operations for the provisional government after Texas declared its independence from Mexico.
In 1823, Mexico confirmed this land grant and allowed Austin's son, Stephen F. Austin, to sell plots of land to settlers so long as they were of good character.
The Anglos held a convention in 1833, at San Felipe, 130 miles east of San Antonio, attended by around 56 delegates.
The military leader of the Anglos, Sam Houston, was practical and advised fighters to abandon San Antonio, proclaiming that standing there was futile, but a couple of hundred of them refused.
On April 20, Santa Anna, now with a force of around 1,110 men, met a force of 800 men led by Sam Houston, near the San Jacinto River, on the eastern side of what is now the city of Houston.
Portrait of Stephen F. Austin.
Portrait of Stephen F. Austin.
During the 1820s, San Felipe de Austin emerged as the capital of the Anglo colonies in Mexican Texas.
The Convention of 1832 (following antagonisms throughout Mexican Texas) was comprised of 55 delegates, none of whom were Tejano, representing 16 districts of Texas.
Stephen F. Austin was elected president of the convention, which met from October 1st through the 6th.
William H. Wharton presided over the meeting, and the convention petitioned for repeal of the anti-immigration section of the Law of April 6, 1830.
Sam Houston chaired a committee to draft a constitution, presuming the request for separate statehood would be accepted.
While the Declaration of Independence was adopted at convention in nearby Washington-on-the-Brazos, the events that led to independence largely swirled around Stephen F. Austin’s colonial headquarters at San Felipe de Austin.
Convention of 1832 October 1, 1832 58 Delegates, Stephen F. Austin, Pres. Adopted Resolutions for Reform: Tariff reduction No restrictions on immigration from US Funding primary schools Texas as a separate state Convention illegal – resolutions failed
Convention of 1833 Independent statehood for Texas Drafted a state constitution Lift ban on immigration to Texas Stephen F. Austin presented petitions to Mexican government
They are documented as having stopped at Nacogdoches, at Jared E. Groce's farm on the Brazos River, and in San Felipe, where Bowie presented a letter of introduction to Stephen F. Austin from Thomas F. McKinney, one of the Old Three Hundred colonists.
Although the unit would not be officially organized until 1835, Stephen F. Austin founded the group by employing up to 30 men to help keep the peace, primarily by chasing Indians.
[17] Bowie later served as a delegate to the Convention of 1833, which drew up a document formally requesting independent statehood in Mexico.
Stephen F. Austin returned to Texas in September 1835 and was soon elected the commander of the volunteer army in Texas.
On the orders of Austin and General Sam Houston, who commanded the Texas regular army, Bowie and Captain James W. Fannin scouted the area south of Bexar.
Bowie was one of fifty-six delegates to meet in San Felipe de Austin
from April 1 through 13, 1833, to draft petitions to the Mexican government, including independent statehood from Coahuila and a lift to the ban on foreign immigration, during the Convention of 1833.
One of two known copies of Sam Houston’s historic broadside, appealing to the citizens of Texas for aid on the very day Texas declared her independence, sold for $52,500, nearly four times its estimate following interest from five bidders.
One of two known copies of Sam Houston’s historic broadside sold for $52,500.
Among the extensive selection of documents signed by fallen heroes of the Alamo, include a letter penned and signed by David “Davy” Crockett, which sold for $37,500, and a two-page letter by William Barret Travis, written to secure a position of chief of police of San Felipe de Austin, which sold for $25,000.
A four-page 1824 Land Grant signed by Stephen F. Austin, conveying one league of land in Austin’s Colony (modern-day Matagorda and Brazoria Counties), sold for $17,500, and rare document signed by Mathew Caldwell, aka Texas’ Paul Revere, also sold for $17,500 – nearly 10 times its original estimate.
Known as the "Birthplace of Anglo-American Settlement in Texas" (near present day Houston), San Felipe de Austin was named for Stephen F. Austin, who brought his first Texas colonists here in 1823.
The Stephen F. Austin Park Association operates an information center at the San Felipe Post Office.
Stephen F. Austin State Park -
Dominating many monuments and historical markers is a magnificent statue of Stephen F. Austin, "The Father of Texas".
San Felipe de Austin, on the west bank of the Brazos River at the Old San Antonio Road crossing, a site now on Interstate Highway 10 two miles east of Sealy in southeastern Austin County, was founded in 1824 by Stephen F. Austin as the unofficial capital of his colony.
After the fall of the Alamo, Gen. Sam Houston's army retreated through San Felipe.
Most of the original town site on the banks of Bullinger's Creek now lies within the 4,200-acre Stephen F. Austin State Historical Park, which was dedicated in 1928 and donated to the state by the town of San Felipe in 1940.
The park features an obelisk and a bronze statue commemorating the achievements of Stephen F. Austin, a replica of Austin's log house, and a monument on the site of the town hall, where the conventions of 1832 and 1833 and the Consultation of 1835 were held.
***  Convention of 1833
William H. Wharton, more volatile than Austin, was selected to preside.
Sam Houston, a new leader on the Texas political horizon, attended from Nacogdoches.
Blanche Hoff, San Felipe de Austin: Capital of Austin's Colony (Houston?
Wilma Harper Moore, A History of San Felipe de Austin, 1824-1836 (M.A. thesis, University of Texas, 1929).
The Convention of 1833 met at San Felipe on April 1 as a successor to the Convention of 1832, to which San Fernando de Béxar (San Antonio) had refused to send delegates.
While Stephen F. Austin was visiting the Mexican settlements in an effort to secure their cooperation, less patient settlers called the new convention, which met on the day that Antonio López de Santa Anna took power.
Approximately fifty-six delegates attended, including Sam Houston, a delegate from Nacogdoches.
William H. Wharton presided, and Thomas Hastings was secretary.
Stephen F. Austin, "Explanation to the Public Concerning the Affairs of Texas, by Citizen Stephen F. Austin," Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Association 8 (January 1905).
Eugene C. Barker, The Life of Stephen F. Austin (Nashville: Cokesbury Press, 1925; rpt., Austin: Texas State Historical Association, 1949; New York: AMS Press, 1970).
Stephen F. Austin, an Anglo, was consulted by its framers.
Under the 1824 Mexican Constitution, the Spanish province of Texas was combined with the state of Coahuila forming the new state of Coahuila y Tejas.
The new state legislature in Saltillo finally published a state constitution on March 11, 1827 – more than two years after it first convened.
The Mexican Constitution required that each state constitution separate executive, legislative, and judicial authority.
Like its parent federal constitution, the new state constitution contained elements that were clearly derived from the Spanish tradition.
Stephen F. Austin recommended to the state legislature of Coahuila y Tejas that a moratorium be placed on the collection of the Anglo colonists' debt to foreign creditors (mostly creditors in the United States).
The decree was repealed in 1831, but the principle came back as a statute during the state's independent period in 1839 and later was enshrined in the Texas Constitution of 1845 and all subsequent state constitutions.
When Stephen F. Austin delivered this to Mexico City, he was imprisoned – a key milestone in the growing tensions between Texas and the Mexican government.
-Sam Houston Dixon in Romance and Tragedy of Texas History.
First Consultation and Convention, San Felipe de Austin 1 Oct 1832.
Stephen F. Austin was elected president, defeating William Wharton and Francis W. Johnson was elected secretary.
Stephen F. Austin (left), Wiley Martin, Francis Johnson (right), Luke Leassier
John Austin, George B. McKinstry, Charles B. Sayre, William H. Wharton (photo)
San Felipe de Austin, October 4, 1832 To the Federal Congress of Mexico:
The general meeting, under a sense of the high importance of the matters discussed and acted upon, agreed upon sending a delegate to Saltillo and Mexico, charged with the duty of earnestly urging them upon the consideration of the government, and to that end they selected citizen William H. Wharton as their representative.
But, after the meeting had concluded their business, the delegates from Goliad arrived and, having manifested to the committee their hearty acquiescence in the conclusions reached by that convention, and expressed the wish of the people of Goliad that a delegate should be appointed from their district to accompany citizen William H. Wharton on his mission before mentioned, and Don Rafael Manchola having been suggested, it was agreed by the committee jointly with the delegates from Goliad that he receive the appointment, subject to the concurrence of all the subordinate committees.
William H. Wharton and Don Rafael Manchola were appointed commissioners to Saltillo and Mexico City to present the memorials to the authorities.
At first Texans were encouraged by the response of Jefe-Politico Don Jose M. de La Garza in San Antonio de Bexar who wrote a letter to Stephen F. Austin containing the statement:
Part of a letter of 8 Nov also found in the Mexican archives was to Stephen F. Austin with an enclosure to the San Felipe Ayuntamiento from Ramon Musquiz of Bexar, who would be the successor to Garza as Jefe-Politico.
Col. Stephen F. Austin, the President of the first consulation replied:
Second Consultation and Convention, San Felipe de Austin Apr 1833.
With the feeling that the central government or the government of Coahuila and Texas gave little or no serious consideration to the memorial from the first consultation presented to them, a second convention composed of fifty-six delegates, a majority of whom had served as members of the first convention of 1832 was organized largely by William H. Wharton, president, and Thomas Hastings, secretary.
The diverse opinions concerning strategy and objectives for Texas emerged more clearly, ranging from those who were for repeal of the Bustamente decree of 1830 and tariff relief, those for petitioning for independent statehood with assurance of loyalty to the government without a constitution, and those for drafting a constitution with independence.
Stephen F. Austin was for petition for independent statehood, but without drafting a constitution while William H. Wharton, who was elected president instead of Austin for the consultation, was for the latter course.
Stephen F. Austin (Austin)
William H. Wharton (Victoria)
A constitution was drafted by a committee comprised of Sam Houston, Chairman; Nestor Clay, R. A. Williamson, James Kerr, Oliver Jones, Luke Leassier and Henry Smith.
The petition for independent statehood was based on a decree of 7 May 1824 of the Mexican Congress "so soon as Texas shall be in a condition to figure as a state of itself, it shall inform Congress thereof, for its resolution" followed by the precise practical arguments of distance, different interests, dependence on Coahuila, economic potential and others.
The inhabitants of all Texas, met in General Convention, at the Town of San Felipe de Austin, by means of delegates, for the purpose of making known their wants to the government, most respectfully represent, that they desire the separation of Texas from Coahuila; believing such separation indispensable to their mutual happiness and prosperity; and that ultimately, such division would produce the most happy results to the Mexican Republic.
Stephen F. Austin, James B. Miller and Erasmo Seguin were appointed commissioners to present the proposed constitution to the authorities of Mexico.
The Convention of 1833, a political gathering of settlers in Mexican Texas to help draft a series of petitions to the Mexican government, begins in San Felipe de Austin (1.
Spotlight on Sam Houston
Sam Houston was born on March 2, 1793, in Rockbridge County, Tennessee.
In late 1818, Sam Houston was elected attorney general of Nashville, but later returned to his private law practice in the early 1820s.
He left his Cherokee family and entered Mexican Texas.
He immediately got involved in Anglo-Texan affairs, serving as a delegate to the Convention of 1833.
As unrest grew in Mexican Texas, he considered whether there should be another consultation to attempt to resolve the issues.
In the meantime, Sam Houston returned from Washington-on-the-Brazos to his army in Gonzales and they retreated towards the east.
However, Sam Houston needed time to train his newly-formed, poorly-trained volunteer army.
The Battle of San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, proved General Sam Houston’s ability to lead his army to victory.
Sam Houston at the Battle of San Jacinto
Sam Houston became the first elected president of the Republic of Texas, defeating Stephen F. Austin.
In late 1836, Sam Houston sent prisoner-of-war Santa Anna to Washington to seek Texas’s annexation to the United States.
According to its constitution, Sam Houston was unable to succeed himself as President of the Republic of Texas, so he ran for and served in the House of Representatives from 1839-1841.
When Texas joined the Union in 1845, Sam Houston served as one of its two U.S. Senators.
Convention of 1833
William H. Wharton, more volatile than Austin, was selected to preside.
Sam Houston, a new leader on the Texas political horizon, attended from Nacogdoches.
Held in San Felipe de Austin, the Convention of 1832 adopted a series of resolutions to be presented to the Mexican Congress.
Location/Date: San Felipe de Austin: December 7, 1832
The Convention of 1833 met at San Felipe de Austin in April 1833.
Stephen F. Austin traveled to Mexico City to present the memorial to the Mexican government.
1793 - Sam Houston is born in Rockbridge County, Virginia .
However, Moses Austin dies before this can be done and his son Stephen F. Austin carries on his father's goal by taking the 300 families to Texas .
1833 - Convention of 1833 .
1834 - Stephen F. Austin travels to Mexico City to present petitions to the government on behalf of Texas .
1835 - Stephen F. Austin announces that war with Mexico is necessary to secure the freedom of Texas .
1835 October 11 - Stephen F. Austin elected commander of the Volunteer Army of the People.
The Consultation meets in San Felipe de Austin to form a new government.
1836 January 14 - Sam Houston arrives at Goliad .
Sam Houston is appointed commander of Texas forces.
Houston and his army camp near San Felipe de Austin.
1836 April 21 - Battle of San Jacinto : Texan army under Sam Houston overwhelmingly defeats Mexican force under Santa Anna , securing Texas independence.
