Birmingham campaign

When was the Birmingham campaign?
April - May 1963
Who organised the Birmingham campaign?
"Project C"
28th August 1963
The Birmingham Campaign was a Birmingham-based strategic effort by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to promote civil rights for African Americans in the spring of 1963.
In 1963, Birmingham was one of the most racially segregated cities in the United States.
Fred Shuttlesworth was the head of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, that was organized in 1956 to challenge the City of Birmingham's segregation policies through lawsuits and other protests.
The Albany movement proved to be an important education for the SCLC when it undertook the Birmingham Campaign in 1963.
Modeling after the Montgomery Bus Boycott, protest actions began in the spring of 1963 to affect the second busiest shopping season of the year.
14 Protesters suspected they would meet with violence from the Birmingham Police Department, but chose a confrontational approach to get the attention of the federal government.7 Wyatt Tee Walker headed the planning of what he titled "Project C" that stood for "confrontation".
Along with Ralph Abernathy, King elected to be among those arrested on Good Friday, April 12, 1963.
James Bevel, a religious leader and veteran of the Nashville sit-ins organized the students.
May 2, 1963
11 Wyatt Tee Walker responded to the criticism saying, "Negro children will get a better education in five days in jail than in five months in a segregated school."
May 3, 1963
James Bevel wove in and out of the crowds warning them, "If any cops get hurt, we're going to lose this fight."
James Bevel borrowed a bullhorn from the police and shouted, "Everybody get off this corner.
May 7, 1963
The situation hit its crisis on May 7, 1963.
Fire hoses were used once again, injuring police and Fred Shuttlesworth, as well as other demonstrators.
On May 10, Fred Shuttlesworth and Martin Luther King, Jr. told reporters they had an agreement from the City of Birmingham to desegregate lunch counters, restrooms, drinking fountains and fitting rooms within 90 days, as well as hiring blacks in stores as salesmen and clerks.
13 In June of 1963, the Jim Crow signs segregating facilities in Birmingham were taken down forever.
In the summer of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr. led the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom where he delivered his most famous speech, "I Have a Dream."
Birmingham Campaign of 1963
The city's violent response to the spring 1963 demonstrations against white supremacy forced the federal government to intervene on behalf of race reform.
In spring of 1962, Birmingham's black college students initiated the Selective Buying Campaign and, with support from Shuttlesworth and ACMHR, which became the catalyst for the spring 1963 demonstrations.
Chosen as secretary of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) when it organized in 1957, Shutttlesworth had been an active member of the region's leading civil rights group.
"Bull" Connor in 1963
Having learned from prior mistakes, King's lieutenant, the Reverend Wyatt Tee Walker, proposed a limited campaign of sit-ins and pickets designed to pressure merchants and local business leaders into demanding the city commission repeal the municipal segregation ordinances.
The joint ACMHR-SCLC Birmingham campaign began quietly with sit-ins on April 3, 1963, at several downtown "whites-only" lunch counters.
In a desperate bid to generate media coverage and to keep the campaign alive, King's lieutenants launched the Children's Crusade on May 2, 1963, in which black youth from area schools served as demonstrators.
When court-ordered school desegregation arrived in the city in September 1963, Klansmen bombed the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, killing four black girls.
Nevertheless, the appointment of Arthur Shores to the city council in 1968 and the election of Richard Arrington as mayor in 1979 represented the strength of the growing black electorate and the success of black political empowerment that grew directly out of the Birmingham campaign.
Garrow, David J. Birmingham, Alabama, 1956-1963: The Black Struggle for Civil Rights.
A Fire You Can't Put Out: The Civil Rights Life of Birmingham's Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth.
Credited by Martin Luther King with initiating the Children’s Crusade during the Birmingham Campaign of 1963, James Bevel emerged as a civil rights leader from the ranks of the Nashville, Tennessee, student movement.
Bevel was at King’s side during many of the major campaigns of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and was at the Lorraine Motel at the time of King’s assassination in 1968.
Bevel and Nash moved to Alabama in the spring of 1963 and played leading roles, along with Dorothy Cotton, Andrew Young, Bernard Lee, Fred Shuttlesworth and the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, in the campaign to desegregate Birmingham.
(L to R) Ralph Abernathy, Andrew Young, King, and Coretta Scott King confer with James Bevel, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference’s vanguard organizer in Selma, during the last leg of the Selma to Montgomery March, 25 March 1965.
The Birmingham Campaign was a series of protests against racial segregation in Birmingham, Alabama that took place in April of 1963.
These leaders included Martin Luther King, Jr., Wyatt Tee Walker, and Fred Shuttlesworth.
Project C
The protests were codenamed Project C.
The protests began on April 3, 1963.
On April 12, 1963, knowing they would get arrested, a number of protesters led by Martin Luther King, Jr. set out on a march.
King remained in Jail until April 20, 1963.
Although there were still many issues with racism, the Birmingham campaign did break down some barriers with segregation in the city.
When the new school year started up in September of 1963, the schools were integrated as well.
The 1963 Birmingham movement was a movement organized in the early 1963 by the SCLC (Southern Christian Leadership Conference) to bring attention to the integration efforts of African Americans in Birmingham, Alabama.
The movement was led by James Bevel, Fred Shuttlesworth, Martin Luther King and others.
On May 8, 1963 at 4:00 pm white business leaders agreed to most of the protesters demands.
On May 10, Fred Shuttlesworth and Martin Luther King told reporters they had an agreement from the city of Birmingham to desegregate lunch counters, restrooms, drinking fountains and fitting rooms within 90 days, and to hire blacks in stores as salesmen and clerks.
The Birmingham campaign inspired the Civil Rights Movement in other parts of the South.
On June 12 1963 Evers was fatally shot outside of his home.
Despite energetic organization on the local level, Birmingham, Alabama remained a largely segregated city in the spring of 1963 when Martin Luther King Jr. and his colleagues at the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) launched Project C (for confrontation), an ambitious program that wedded economic pressure and large scale direct action protest to undermine the city's rigid system of segregation.
On this day in 1963, Governor George C. Wallace delivered his infamous inaugural address.
The SCLC's Fred Shuttlesworth, Ralph Abernathy, and Martin Luther King jr. participated in a rally attended by 4,000 people.
On this day in 1963 Martin Luther King was arrested while taking part in the Birmingham campaign, a movement organized by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to bring attention to the integration efforts of African Americans in Birmingham, Alabama.
On this day in 1963, while in solitary confinement in a Birmingham jail, King wrote a letter in response to a group of white preachers that had released “Call to Unity,” asking for civil rights protesters to stop demonstrations.
Many view this march as a trial run for the 1963 March on Washington.
May 2nd – Children’s Crusade Revitalizes Birmingham Campaign On this day in 1963 large groups of black teens began a series of marches through downtown Birmingham, Alabama in an effort to desegregate public facilities.
May 22nd   Klansman Bobby Frank Cherry Convicted in 1963 Case.
June 2nd – Walter Fauntroy Leads SCLC’s D.C. Division On this day in 1962, Walter Fauntroy was the head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in Washington, D.C.  Fauntroy was a local coordinator for the 1963 March on Washington, an organizer for the 1965 Selma-to-Montgomery March, and the March against Fear in 1966.
June 7th  – Danville Protesters Indicted Under John Brown Law On this day in 1963, protesters in Danville, Virginia, were Charged under a pre-Civil War “John Brown” statute.
June 11th – George Wallace Stands in Schoolhouse Door On this day in 1963, Alabama Governor, George Wallace, stood in the doorway of the University of Alabama barring two black students from entering.
June 12th – Medgar Evers Assassinated in Mississippi On this day in 1963, NAACP activist, Medgar Evers, was shot and killed.
On this day in 1963, Byron De La Beckwith was charged with the murder of Medgar Evers.
On this day in 1963, black doctors and the NAACP protested the American Medical Association in Chicago, Illinois.
Medgar’s assassination in 1963 brought Charles to the forefront of the civil rights movement.
In 1963 Young was a key organizer of the March on Washington.
It was the 1963 publication of his confrontational essay, The Fire Next Time, on American racial politics that thrust him into the center of the movement.
On this day in 1963, “Freedom Vote” registered blacks in the poor counties of Mississippi.
On this day in 1963, one of the most influential African Americans who ever lived died.
On this day in 1963, more than 250,000 people rallied in the nation’s capitol for jobs and freedom.
Martin Luther King III and Fred Shuttlesworth gave speeches in favor of Perkins.
On this day in 1963, a bomb exploded in the basement of Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, while Sunday school was in session.
Under Forman’s watch, the Albany Campaign, the 1963 March on Washington, Mississippi Freedom Summer, and the Selma campaign all occurred.
Upon hearing a sermon in August 1962, by James Bevel of the SCLC, Fannie Lou Hamer volunteered to register to vote.
On this day in 1963, Robert Chambliss was found not guilty of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church bombing in Birmingham, Alabama.
Viewing her career as mission work, she sang at special events including the inauguration of John F. Kennedy, and the 1963 March on Washington.
In 1963, President John F. Kennedy appointed Stout as a special ambassador to the Kenya Independence Celebration.
He helped oversee the desegregation of the University of Mississippi in 1962 and the desegregation of the University of Alabama in 1963.
On this day in 1963, Malcolm X delivered one of his most famous speeches at the Northern Negro Grass Roots Leadership Conference in Detroit.
In 1963 SNCC activists had gone to Selma and joined with the DCVL to step up registration efforts.
In 1963 he became part of the SCLC staff, eventually becoming head of the voter education division.
On this day in 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.
It was after the Birmingham campaign that he began to focus more strongly on the discrimination by blacks in the South.
In Dallas on November 22, 1963, Kennedy’s motorcade traveled slowly down Main Street.
On this day in 1963, Reverend C. T. Vivian was in his first year as a member of the SCLC.
His criticism of other black leaders cost him an invitation to the 1963 March on Washington.
Shuttlesworth was instrumental in the 1963 “Birmingham campaign” that led to the city changing its discrimination laws.
That year, 1963, was also the year of the historic March on Washington at which the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his famous “I have a dream” speech and the Marables were there.
April 16, 1963
We have some 85 affiliate organizations all across the South … Several months ago our local affiliate here in Birmingham invited us to be on call to engage in a nonviolent direct action program if such were deemed necessary.
But I have tried to say that this normal and healthy discontent can be channeled through the creative outlet of nonviolent direct action.
Birmingham 1963
Citation: C N Trueman "Birmingham 1963"
In 1963, Birmingham became a focus for the civil rights movement.
Whether it was through the activities of Bull Connor or the bombed church which killed four school girls, many Americans would have known about Birmingham by 1963.
In April 1963 King and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) joined with Birmingham, Alabama’s existing local movement, the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights (ACMHR), in a massive direct action campaign to attack the city’s segregation system by putting pressure on Birmingham’s merchants during the Easter season, the second biggest shopping season of the year.
As ACMHR founder Fred Shuttlesworth stated in the group’s ‘‘Birmingham Manifesto,’’ the campaign was ‘‘a moral witness to give our community a chance to survive’’ (ACMHR, 3 April 1963).
The campaign was originally scheduled to begin in early March 1963, but was postponed until 2 April when the relatively moderate Albert Boutwell defeated Birmingham’s segregationist commissioner of public safety, Eugene ‘‘Bull’’ Connor, in a run-off mayoral election.
King declared: ‘‘We cannot in all good conscience obey such an injunction which is an unjust, undemocratic and unconstitutional misuse of the legal process’’ (ACMHR, 11 April 1963).
Bail money was made available, and he was released on 20 April 1963.
In order to sustain the campaign, SCLC organizer James Bevel proposed using young children in demonstrations.
For they are doing a job for not only themselves, but for all of America and for all mankind’’ (King, 6 May 1963).
By 10 May negotiators had reached an agreement, and despite his falling out with King, Shuttlesworth joined him and Abernathy to read the prepared statement that detailed the compromise: the removal of ‘‘Whites Only’’ and ‘‘Blacks Only’’ signs in restrooms and on drinking fountains, a plan to desegregate lunch counters, an ongoing ‘‘program of upgrading Negro employment,’’ the formation of a biracial committee to monitor the progress of the agreement, and the release of jailed protestors on bond (‘‘The Birmingham Truce Agreement,’’ 10 May 1963).
King delivered the eulogy at the 18 September joint funeral of three of the victims, preaching that the girls were ‘‘the martyred heroines of a holy crusade for freedom and human dignity’’ (King, 18 September 1963).
ACMHR, ‘‘Birmingham Manifesto,’’ 3 April 1963.
ACMHR, Press release, Statement by M. L. King, et al., 11 April 1963.
‘‘The Birmingham Truce Agreement,’’ 10 May 1963, in Eyes on the Prize, Carson, et al., ed., 1991.
King, Address delivered at mass meeting, 6 May 1963.
King, Eulogy for Carol Denise McNair, et al., 18 September 1963.
In the spring of 1963, activists in Birmingham, Alabama launched one of the most influential campaigns of the Civil Rights Movement: Project C, better known as The Birmingham Campaign.
In the spring of 1963, activists in Birmingham, Alabama launched one of the most influential campaigns of the Civil Rights Movement: Project C, better known as The Birmingham Campaign.
An Ugly Situation in Birmingham, 1963
The Birmingham Campaign ended with a victory in May of 1963 when local officials agreed to remove "White Only" and "Black Only" signs from restrooms and drinking fountains in downtown Birmingham; desegregate lunch counters; deploy a "Negro job improvement plan"; release jailed demonstrators; and create a biracial committee to monitor the agreement.
On July 15, 1963, photographer Bill Hudson snapped this photograph as members of the Birmingham Fire Department turned their hoses full force on civil rights demonstrators.
In the spring of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Coalition led a strategic campaign in Birmingham, Alabama that was aimed at ending the city’s segregation policies and practices.
In 1963, the activists of the Civil Rights movement had made the decision to design a plan of protest against the oppression of the discrimination practices in Birmingham.
The official name was called “Project C” but it became commonly known as the Birmingham Campaign.
In May, 1963, the Birmingham Campaign officially ended in a victory when the local officials agreed to the removal of the signs that were posted that said “White Only” and “Black Only” from the bathrooms and drinking fountains in downtown Birmingham.
