1689 Boston Revolt

In 1689, colonists in Boston revolted and deposed Sir Edmund Andros, governor of the Dominion.
On April 18, 1689, a well-organized "mob" of provincial militia and citizens formed in the city of Boston.
They arrested dominion officials as a protest against the rule of Sir Edmund Andros, the governor of the Dominion of New England.
Andros, commissioned governor of New England in 1686, had earned the enmity of the local populace by enforcing the restrictive Navigation Acts, denying the validity of existing land titles, restricting town meetings, and appointing unpopular regular officers to lead colonial militia, among other actions that were part of an attempt to bring the colonies under the closer control of the crown.
Furthermore, he had infuriated Puritans in Boston by promoting the Church of England, which was disliked by many Nonconformist New England colonists.
Members of the Church of England, believed by Puritans to sympathize with the administration of the dominion, were also taken into custody by the rebels.
Royal authority was not restored until 1691, when English troops and a new governor were sent to New York.
The charters of other colonies were also annulled, and Sir Edmund Andros was appointed by the crown to govern over all.
Fearing an uprising, Andros, who resided in town, retreated to Fort Hill where he was arrested without incident, and the "bloodless restoration" of the rights of Massachusetts citizens was achieved April 19, 1689.
Purtians A group of English Protestants who were prosecuted by the Church of England.
1689 Boston Revolt England wanted to reform the colonies and they revoked the charter and sent a new governor that instated unpopular laws and forced the Church of England on them.
The Puritans revolted and sent the governor back for trial.
A new governor was instated and more religious tolerance was promised but the Puritans never got back the power to rule themselves.
Jacob Leisler German American merchant who lead a rebellion against the unpopular governor of New York after hearing about the Boston Revolt.
England sent and army years later and restored authority in 1691 with a new governor.
Diversity was an American characteristic as the Dutch of New Netherland, the Swedes and Finns of New Sweden, the English Quakers of Pennsylvania, the English Puritans of New England, the English settlers of Jamestown, and the "worthy poor" of Georgia, came to the new continent and built colonies with distinctive social, religious, political and economic styles.
The prospect of religious persecution by authorities of the crown and the Church of England prompted a significant number of colonization efforts.
According to one scholar, "The Illinois Habitant was a gay soul; he seemed shockingly carefree to later, self-righteous Puritans from the American colonies."
The colonial assembly shared power with a royally appointed governor.
Puritans[edit]
The Puritans, a much larger group than the Pilgrims, established the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1629 with 400 settlers.
They sought to reform the Church of England by creating a new, pure church in the New World.
The Puritans created a deeply religious, socially tight-knit, and politically innovative culture that still influences the modern United States.
Roger Williams, who preached religious toleration, separation of Church and State, and a complete break with the Church of England, was banished and founded Rhode Island Colony, which became a haven for other refugees from the Puritan community, such as Anne Hutchinson.
Other colonists who disagreed with Puritans in Massachusetts settled to the north, mingling with adventurers and profit-oriented settlers to establish more religiously diverse colonies in New Hampshire and Maine.
The administration eventually led by Governor Sir Edmund Andros seized colonial charters, revoked land titles, and ruled without local assemblies, causing anger among the population.
The 1689 Boston revolt, inspired by England's Glorious Revolution against James II, caused Andros, Boston Anglicans, and senior dominion officials to be arrested by the Massachusetts militia.
Although King William III sought at least to unite the New England colonies militarily (for example, by appointing the Earl of Bellomont to three simultaneous governorships, and military command over Connecticut and Rhode Island), these attempts at unified control failed.
In 1691 Sir Francis Nicholson, the governor, organized competitions for the “better sort of Virginians onely who are Batchelors,” and he offered prizes “to be shot for, wrastled, played at backswords, & Run for by Horse and foott.”
A governor (and in some provinces his council) were appointed by the crown.
The governor was invested with general executive powers, and authorized to call a locally elected assembly.
The governor's council would sit as an upper house when the assembly was in session in addition to its role in advising the governor.
The governor had the power of absolute veto, and could prorogue (i.e., delay) and dissolve the assembly.
In practice this did not always occur, since many of the provincial assemblies sought to expand their powers and limit those of the governor and crown.
They were governed much as royal colonies except that lord proprietors, rather than the king, appointed the governor.
Finally, and most dramatically, the Americans were fascinated by and increasingly adopted the political values of Republicanism, which stressed equal rights, the need for virtuous citizens, and the evils of corruption, luxury, and aristocracy.
None of the colonies had stable political parties of the sort that formed in the 1790s, but each had shifting factions that vied for power, especially in the perennial battles between the appointed governor and the elected assembly.
[66] There were often "country" and "court" factions, representing those opposed to and in favor of, respectively, of the governor's actions and agenda.
From the 1670s several royal governors, notably Sir Edmund Andros (who at various times governed New York, New England, and Virginia) and Francis Nicholson (governed Maryland, Virginia, Nova Scotia, and Carolina) proposed or attempted to implement means to coordinate defensive and offensive military matters.
Many Americans at the time saw the colonies' systems of governance as modeled after the British constitution of the time, with the king corresponding to the governor, the House of Commons to the colonial assembly, and the House of Lords to the governor's council.
The Puritans of New England seldom kept in touch with nonconformists in England.
In New England, the Puritans created self-governing communities of religious congregations of farmers, or yeomen, and their families.
The Congregational Church, the church the Puritans founded, was not automatically joined by all New England residents because of Puritan beliefs that God singled out specific people for salvation.
Education was primarily the responsibility of families, but numerous religious groups, especially the Puritans in New England, established tax-supported elementary schools so their children could read the Bible.
American scientific activity was symbolized by David Rittenhouse, who constructed the first planetarium in the Western Hemisphere, New York lieutenant governor Cadwallader Colden, botanist and anthropologist, and Dr. Benjamin Rush, the celebrated physician and social reformer and member of the American Philosophical Society founded by Benjamin Franklin, who had contributed important discoveries to physics such as electricity, but was more successful in his practical inventions such as stoves and lightning rods.
Puritans in New England and Quakers in Pennsylvania opposed theatrical performances as immoral and ungodly.
Puritans founded Harvard College in 1636 and Yale College in 1701.
London did not make the Church of England official in the colonies—it never sent a bishop—so religious practice became diverse.
James II liked the Dominion concept not only because it favored the Church of England but also because it centralized political power in the hands of a governor and a large advisory council made up of Crown appointees.
From the outset the Dominion was a bad idea, perhaps made worse by naming as governor Sir Edmund Andros (1637-1714), a man of aristocratic bearing with impressive military credentials.
Andros expected the Puritans to conform to the imperial will.
They seized the governor on April 18, 1689, threw him in jail, and then shipped him back to England.
Francis Nicholson served in New York City as the Dominion's lieutenant governor.
Wealthy Dutch and English landholders and merchants cooperated with his rule, which bred resentment among poorer Dutch and English settlers, such as the Puritans on Long Island.
The proprietary governor, William Joseph, tried to contain the popish conspiracy rumors, but John Coode, an anxious local planter, organized the Protestant Association to defend Marylanders from the impending slaughter.
Rumormongers soon were whispering that the Catholic proprietor and his local governor were in on the plot.
An emergency town meeting was called by John Andrews, chairman of the Ipswich selectmen to debate a new tax imposed by the crown-appointed governor Sir Edmund Andros.
The king had just tossed out the rules and placed a bureaucrat named Sir Edmund Andros in charge of a new “Dominion of New England”.
On April 18, 1689 a group of provincial militia and citizens gathered in Boston and arrested several “Dominion” officials as well as several suspected sympathizers.
Sir Edmund Andros is hauled to jail in Boston
Colonists in Boston revolted against a hated English governor 86 years and one day before the shot was heard round the world in Concord, Mass.
The Puritan colonists overthrew Sir Edmund Andros, for some of the same reasons the Protestant William of Orange overthrew the Catholic James II.
James’ religious tolerance was as troubling to England’s political leaders as was Andros’ support of the Anglican Church to New England’s Puritans.
Andros’ doom was probably sealed the day he forced the Puritans’ Old South Church to host an Anglican service on Good Friday.
They ignored trade restrictions and they did not tolerate the Church of England.
Restrictions on trade and navigation were to be obeyed; and no one was to be prohibited from celebrating the ritual of the Church of England.
He seemed like a good choice, as he had been governor of the provinces of New York, East and West Jersey, Virginia, and Maryland.
The day he set foot in Boston, Andros began talks with the Puritan elders for the better accommodation of the Church of England.
The Puritans said no to the man they viewed as a ‘bigoted Papist.’
The Puritans were pretty bigoted themselves.
They objected to the Church of England’s embrace of Catholic traditions.
Boston’s Anglicans were forced to hold services in the open air, even as Puritans tried to disrupt them.
Anglican ministers couldn’t wear a surplice in public, and to recite the Church of England’s burial service at a gravesite was to risk a brawl.
The Puritans refused.
On Good Friday, he ordered the sexton to throw open the doors of Old South and ring the bell for ‘those of the Church of England.’
It was an affront the Puritans would not forgive.
Andros added insult to injury by holding her funeral service at Old South on Feb. 10, 1688, with the pomp and ritual so abhorrent to Puritans.
Andros continued to vex the Massachusetts Puritans.
Early on the morning of April 18, 1689, the inhabitants of Boston took up arms and were joined by militia from neighboring towns streaming into the city.
The colonists revived their old charter, and elected Simon Bradstreet governor, the position he held before King Charles revoked the charter.
April 18, 1689: Day of the Week
April 18, 1689 was the 108th day of the year 1689 in the Gregorian calendar.
The day of the week for April 18, 1689 under the old Julian calendar was Thursday.
April 18, 1689 Historical Event(s)
1689 Bostonians rise up in rebellion against Sir Edmund Andros.
Sir Edmund Andros
About Sir Edmund Andros
Sir Edmund Andros was an early colonial English governor in North America, most notably as the head of the Dominion of New England for most of its three-year existence.
Despite being intensely disliked in New England, Andros was an effective governor in New York and Virginia, although, like many colonial governors, he made powerful local enemies who worked to remove him from office.
fol 175, cited by Sir Edmund Andros, Governor of New York, in the Andros Tracts, Volume 5, edited by William Henry Whitmore, (Prince Society, Boston 1868)
Sir Edmund Andros (1637-1714)
He prohibited citizens from leaving the country without his consent, hence restraining any complaints from being carried to the King.
Boston's Puritans were indignant when the right of marriage was removed from the clergy.
Sir Edmund Andros's Timeline
Landowners wanted to revive old-style feudal estates, farmers aspired to “small holdings”, Puritans wanted to restore the uncorrupted practices of “the early church”, and everybody wished to recover the “good fellowship” and communal warmth of Old England.
During the 1640s, many New England Puritans returned to the motherland to fight for the parliamentary cause, especially university-educated men.
Its first governor, Sir Edmund Andros, had proved his loyalty in the suppression of Monmouth’s rebellion in the English west country in 1685, after which many of the rebels had been transported to the West Indies.
When news of England’s Glorious Revolution reached New England in the spring of 1689, a popular uprising ensued in Boston and Andros was overthrown.
Yet each popular uprising in the colonies invoked the traditional “liberties of Englishmen”.
