Benedict Arnold's expedition to Quebec

Richard Montgomery led another expedition to invade Quebec from Lake Champlain.
The Invasion of Canada in 1775 was the first major military initiative by the newly-formed Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War.
One expedition left Fort Ticonderoga under Richard Montgomery, besieged and captured Fort St. Johns, and very nearly captured British General Guy Carleton when taking Montreal.
General Richard Montgomery (1738-1775)
The Siege of Fort St. Jean, conducted by American Brigadier General Richard Montgomery on the town and fort of Saint-Jean in  Quebec  lasted from Sep  17 to Nov 3, 1775.
General Richard Montgomery was killed, Benedict Arnold was wounded, and Daniel Morgan and more than 400 men were taken prisoner.
Benedict Arnold was a U.S. general who is infamous for becoming a traitor and defecting to the British side during the American Revolutionary War.
The American Revolutionary War broke out between Great Britain and its 13 American colonies in April 1775 with the Battles of Lexington and Concord.
Partly on Arnold’s suggestion, the Continental Congress authorized a two-pronged invasion of the British Province of Quebec in Canada.
Colonel Benedict Arnold led a force of 1,100 Continental Army troops from Cambridge, Massachusetts in September 1775.
Joined by the other expedition led by Richard Montgomery, Arnold led an attack on Quebec City on December 31, 1775.
American victory at the Battles of Saratoga is considered a turning point in the American Revolutionary War as it contributed greatly in the formation of the formal Franco-American alliance.
After British lost the American Revolutionary War in 1783, Arnold tried to gain positions with the British East India Company and the British military, but was denied.
In September 1775, early in the American Revolutionary War, Colonel Benedict Arnold led a force of 1,100 Continental Army troops on an expedition from Cambridge, Massachusetts to the gates of Quebec City.Again this is what the picture shows.
The inexperienced troops, ill-prepared for the hardships, slogged on—a third turned back, a hundred died of exposure, and survivors were reduced to eating soap, shoe leather, and cartridge boxes.
Richard Montgomery
The situation improved somewhat in the American camp with the arrival on 3 December of Richard Montgomery*, who had replaced Schuyler as commander of the other invasion force.
of Sir Charles Douglas and Richard Montgomery).
Map of routes taken by the Benedict Arnold and Richard Montgomery expeditions into Quebec.
One force, of about 3000 men, under Brigadier General Richard Montgomery was to take the standard route to Canada via New York’s Lake George and Lake Champlain to attack Montreal.
Featured image: Montreal, 25 September 1775.
Colonel Benedict Arnold
On December 3, Brigadier General Richard Montgomery, who had replaced an ill Schuyler, arrived with around 300 men.
The first and largest component is the money in specie and paper that Washington provided to its commander, Colonel Benedict Arnold, at the beginning of the expedition.
After meeting up with Arnold’s detachment near Quebec in early December, General Richard Montgomery selected Halsted to be his Commissary, probably at Arnold’s urging.
Invasion of Canada During the American Revolutionary War
Colonel Benedict Arnold was both exhilarated and apprehensive.
As more soldiers arrived, Schuyler passed Congress’ message on to his second-in-command, the energetic Brig. Gen. Richard Montgomery, on August 7.
Thirty-seven years earlier, in September 1775, the Continental Congress had authorized General Richard Montgomery and Colonel Benedict Arnold to lead an invasion of the province of Quebec.
The 1775 campaign against the colony of Quebec involved a two-pronged invasion by Montgomery’s army who advanced along the St. Lawrence River and Arnold’s militia who trekked through the border frontier along the Kennebec River.
[1] Hal Shelton, General Richard Montgomery and the American Revolution: From Redcoat to Rebel (New York: NYU Press, 1996), 154, 5.
[8] Purcell, Sealed with Blood, 153; Michael Gabriel, Major General Richard Montgomery: The Making of an American Hero, (Madison: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2002), 192.
[22] Gabriel, Major General Richard Montgomery, 195.
The journal relates the author’s adventures while stationed around Boston after April 20th and then gives an account of his experiences on the expedition to Quebec led by Colonel Benedict Arnold.
His forty-year interest in the history of the American Revolutionary War and in Benedict Arnold has led to a number of articles on Benedict Arnold and the Revolutionary War.
Benedict Arnold arrived at Fort Western (Augusta ME) in September 1775 where the Continental Army spent their last comfortable day.
During the early part of September of 1775, Colonel Benedict Arnold led a force of 1,100 Continental Army troops from Cambridge, Massachusetts through wilderness country (now Maine).
When Arnold finally reached the French settlements above above the Saint Lawrence River, his force was reduced to 600 starving men who had traveled about 350 miles through a poorly charted wilderness.
American traitor Benedict Arnold, a 34 year old Connecticut merchant at the beginning of the Revolution, had considerable military ability, as he first demonstrated in his epic march through the Maine wilderness in September-November 1775 on his way to join in a two-pronged attack on Quebec, Brigadier General Richard Montgomery leading the other prong up Lake Champlain.
