Empire of Brazil

When Napoleon threatened to conquer the Iberian peninsula in Europe, the Portuguese moved the royal court from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro in 1808.
British and French offices operated in Bahia (Salvador), Pernambuco (Recife) and Rio de Janeiro.
ETA: The ETA – short for ‘Empreza de Transportes Aereos’ or ‘Company of Aerial Transport’ – was  a small Italian-Brazilian airline that operated flights between Rio de Janeiro and Campos and between Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo.
– was a German-Brazilian airline founded in 1927 that operated flights from Porte Alegre to Rio de Janeiro and Natal.
The route took it to Seville in Spain, crossing the Atlantic Ocean to Recife in Brazil, then to Rio de Janeiro, back to Recife and from there to Lakehurst in the United States.
As Napoleon’s forces marched on Portugal, which had been a consistent ally of the Britain, France’s nemesis, the royal court fled for the new world, establishing a court in Rio de Janeiro in 1808.
During his 13-year stay in Rio, Dom João VI brought a number of European-style institutions to the city—a printing press, an opera house, naval and military academies, and much more—so much so that, even after Napoleon’s defeat and exile, the Portuguese monarch did not want to return to the court in Lisbon.
In 1862, to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the coronation Debret acclaims here, elites in Rio de Janeiro unveiled an equestrian statue of Pedro I; Native Brazilians are carved beneath the triumphal national monument as a means of reminding viewers that the country had a past before the Portuguese.
Comparisons of Rio de Janeiro
In 1831, under pressure from the Brazilian military and the Portuguese monarchy, Dom Pedro I returned to Portugal to assume the throne (his father had died five years earlier), leaving his son Pedro II as the claimant to the Brazilian imperial seat of power.
The men on horseback closest to Pedro’s balcony represent the different sectors of Rio de Janeiro, the capital city from 1793 to 1960.
The opening of the ports of Brazil in 1808 to the trade of “all friendly nations” was the first action taken by the newly arrived Portuguese Court after its escape from Lisbon.
It is ironic to note that the first and second partial editions of Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations published in Brazil appeared in 1811 and 1812 in Rio de Janeiro and Bahia respectively, as if to remind the British (and certainly to remind the Brazilians) that hegemonic powers do not always practice what they preach.
And it was not only merchants in Rio de Janeiro or Bahia who were financing the illegal slave trade or the legal commerce in cotton, coffee, and sugar that depended on slave labor.
The expansion of the coffee market in Europe, and most especially in North America, led to a massive renewal in slave imports into Rio de Janeiro, and the expansion of slavery into the Paraíba valley and beyond into São Paulo.
Yet the reality was that Brazil had been independent for all intents and purposes since 1808; since December 16, 1815, Brazil had been a kingdom coequal with Portugal.
Henry Chamberlain, British minister in Rio de Janeiro in 1824, was ever concerned that the social turmoil under the surface in Brazil and evident on the streets and in the constituent assembly in Rio would, as he put it:
The government in London, since the establishment of the Portuguese Court in Rio in 1808, in fact had always made a clear distinction between the circumstances of Brazil and Spanish America.
Dom João, the prince regent, soon to be Dom João VI on the death of his demented mother in 1816, had said as much to Thomas Sumpter Jr., the U.S. envoy in Rio de Janeiro in 1815, “The times have been difficult but now the independence of Brazil is fixed.”
The important point about Brazil, therefore, is that it became economically and politically emancipated between 1808 and 1820 while acting as the center of the Luso-Brazilian Empire.
But if the “anti-colonial” revolution occurred in Oporto not in Rio de Janeiro, the interesting questions from the Brazilian perspective are: Was the will for independence in Brazil sufficiently strong to have achieved this outcome if the liberal revolution had not occurred in Oporto in 1820, if the Portuguese Cortes once convened had not forced the king to return to Europe; was the anti-monarchist sentiment within Brazil strong enough to have provoked a republican movement, such as those in North America and in much of Spanish America which rejected both monarchy and European rule?
The centralized monarchical system had established a very strong institutional presence in Brazil since 1808.
In fact, it had instituted in Rio de Janeiro almost all of the founding institutions, usually the task of a post colonial government: a centralized administration and bureaucracy; superior law courts; a public library and an academy of fine arts; a school of medicine and law; a national press and national bank; and a military academy.
Since 1808 Portugal had not only lost its role as the seat of the monarchy, but it had been subject to invasion and devastating warfare; it had mobilized a population against a common enemy; it had seen its commerce and industry destroyed and its profitable colonial markets lost; and the British, forgetting the cardinal rule of “informal” empire, had subjected a proud and nationalist population to the direct and insensitive rule by a British general.
But the Monroe Doctrine had been foreshadowed some years before in conversations between Jefferson and the envoy of the court of Rio de Janeiro in Washington, the Abbé Corrêa da Serra, and as originally conceived it joined Brazil and the United States together in an “American system,” where the two nations would act collaboratively to keep Europe at bay.
In 1786 he had held a secret meeting in Nimes with a young Brazilian revolutionary who went by the pseudonym “Vendek,” a student from Rio de Janeiro who was then studying at the University of Montpellier.
From many conversations with him, I hope he sees and will promote in his new situation [the Abbé had been recalled to Rio de Janeiro and Jefferson assumed he would become the Minister of External Affairs] the advantages of a cordial fraternization among all the American nations, and the importance of their coalescing in an American system of policy, totally independent of and unconnected with that of Europe.
The U.S. commercial agent in Rio de Janeiro was reporting to him that the Portuguese monarchy in Brazil had “degenerated into complete effeminacy and voluptuousness.
The provisional government had expected support from the United States and France—Jefferson’s friend, the Abbé Corrêa, had worked mightily in Washington to thwart Pernambuco’s representatives and frustrate the merchants of Baltimore who were helping them—but it was Britain that really mattered.22 British influence over the central government in Rio de Janeiro, however, offered much greater opportunities than did the encouragement of separatist revolts.
Until 1820 this intra-imperial trade was a question of internal Luso-Brazilian concern; after 1825, however, this major obstacle to outright interference was removed by the separation of Brazil and Portugal, and British insistence that the African territories remain linked to Lisbon, not to Rio de Janeiro.
José da Silva Lisboa, who had urged the opening of the Brazilian ports to the Prince Regent in 1808, argued in 1818 that the progress of São Paulo was due “to extraordinary preponderance [there] of the white race.”
But what to do about slavery divided “enlightened” men, and it consolidated the determination of those major commercial and landed interests whose welfare depended on slavery to make sure that the new structures of state power, as well as the new constitutional monarchy, remained firmly wedded to their interests.
Not only was Dom João VI forced to return to Lisbon, but the Cortes soon legislated the end to many of the powers that he had granted to his eldest son, Dom Pedro, who had been left in Rio as Regent.
It was against this background that Dom Pedro defied the instructions of the Cortes to return to Europe, accepted the title “Perpetual Defender of Brazil” from the Municipal Council of Rio de Janeiro in early 1822, and then, on September 7, 1822, made his declaration of “independence” on the outskirts of São Paulo.
The political emancipation of Brazil is thus a long and cumulative process with much continuity retained along the way; 1808, 1816, 1822, even 1831 are all important moments in this gradual assertion of separation and definition of nationhood.
Yet by 1858, well into the long reign of Brazil’s second emperor Dom Pedro II, the satisfaction with this outcome was well summarized by Domingos António Raiol in his O Brasil Político: “How different [we Brazilians are] from other people who inhabit the same South American continent.
The alternative model for Brazilian development, in which European immigration and free laborers would replace slavery, was not to be, at least as long as emperors ruled in Rio de Janeiro; and, as a consequence, the slave trade continued until mid-century, slavery until the 1880s.
4 “Treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between His Britannic Majesty and His Royal Highness the Prince Regent of Portugal; signed at Rio de Janeiro, the 19th of February, 1810,” in A. R. Walford, The British Factory in Lisbon & its Closing Stages Ensuing Upon the Treaty of 1810, (Lisbon: Instituto Britânico em Portugal, 1940), 163-184.
9 Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, May 15, 1824, in Charles K. Webster, ed., Britain and the Independence of Latin America, 1812-1830: Select Documents from the Foreign Office Archives, vol.
12 Thomas Sumter Jr., U.S. Minister to the Portuguese Court in Brazil, to James Monroe, Secretary of State, Rio de Janeiro, 29 December, 1815, in William R. Manning, ed., Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States Concerning the Independence of the Latin American Nations, 3 Vols., (New York: Oxford University Press; 1925-[1926]), II, 696-700.
Environment - current issues	water pollution from meat packing/tannery industry; inadequate solid/hazardous waste disposal	deforestation in Amazon Basin destroys the habitat and endangers a multitude of plant and animal species indigenous to the area; there is a lucrative illegal wildlife trade; air and water pollution in Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, and several other large cities; land degradation and water pollution caused by improper mining activities; wetland degradation; severe oil spills
Major cities - population	MONTEVIDEO (capital) 1.672 million (2011)	Sao Paulo 19.924 million; Rio de Janeiro 11.96 million; Belo Horizonte 5.487 million; Porto Alegre 3.933 million; Recife 3.733 million; BRASILIA (capital) 3.813 million (2011)
Administrative divisions	19 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Artigas, Canelones, Cerro Largo, Colonia, Durazno, Flores, Florida, Lavalleja, Maldonado, Montevideo, Paysandu, Rio Negro, Rivera, Rocha, Salto, San Jose, Soriano, Tacuarembo, Treinta y Tres	26 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1 federal district* (distrito federal); Acre, Alagoas, Amapa, Amazonas, Bahia, Ceara, Distrito Federal*, Espirito Santo, Goias, Maranhao, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para, Paraiba, Parana, Pernambuco, Piaui, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rondonia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sao Paulo, Sergipe, Tocantins
Independence	25 August 1825 (from Brazil)	7 September 1822 (from Portugal)
consulate(s) general: Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo
note: the banner was inspired by the national colors of Argentina and by the design of the US flag	green with a large yellow diamond in the center bearing a blue celestial globe with 27 white five-pointed stars; the globe has a white equatorial band with the motto ORDEM E PROGRESSO (Order and Progress); the current flag was inspired by the banner of the former Empire of Brazil (1822-1889); on the imperial flag, the green represented the House of Braganza of Pedro I, the first Emperor of Brazil, while the yellow stood for the Habsburg Family of his wife; on the modern flag the green represents the forests of the country and the yellow rhombus its mineral wealth; the blue circle and stars, which replaced the coat of arms of the original flag, depict the sky over Rio de Janeiro on the morning of 15 November 1889 - the day the Republic of Brazil was declared; the number of stars has changed with the creation of new states and has risen from an original 21 to the current 27 (one for each state and the Federal District)
Ports and terminals	major seaport(s): Montevideo	major seaport(s): Belem, Paranagua, Rio Grande, Rio de Janeiro, Santos, Sao Sebastiao, Tubarao
Since 1808, King Dom João VI had been residing in Brazil, having made it one of the Kingdoms of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and Algarves.
This revolution led to the Constituent Assembly’s meeting and deciding to create the first constitution of the Kingdom and to demand the return of King Dom João VI from Brazil.
On 26 April 1821, the king left Brazil in the hands of his son, the newly elected Prince Regent, Dom Pedro, and returned to Portugal.
In September 1821, the provincial governments of Brazil were put in political subordination to Portugal, which left Pedro nothing more than the Governor of Rio de Janeiro, which was just a province.
Pedro was also ordered to go back to Europe and any courts that his father had created in 1808 were done away with.
Upon his return to Rio de Janeiro in September, he received a letter from José Bonifácio informing him that the Cortes had cancelled all acts from the Bonifácio cabinet and had stripped him of all the power he retained.
On 12 October 1822, Prince Pedro was acclaimed Dom Pedro I, Constitutional Emperor and Perpetual Defender of Brazil.
Indeed; this is an astonishingly complex society — which essentially descended from a Garden of Eden (before the Portuguese "discovered" it in 1500) to slavery (which still permeates all social relations) to a crucial event in 1808: the arrival of Dom John VI of Portugal (and Emperor of Brazil for life), fleeing Napoleon's invasion, and carrying with him 20,000 people who masterminded the "modern" Brazilian state.
A semi-heroic portrayal of the “Grito de Ipiranga” of 7 September 1822, when Brazil’s Pedro I proclaimed Brazilian independence from Portugal and initiated the Brazilian Empire.
However, with Napoleon’s invasion of the Iberian Peninsula in 1808, regent João VI (acting as regent for his mother until 1816, when he became king of Portugal), the Portuguese court picked up and relocated to Rio de Janeiro, making Brazil the seat of the Portuguese Empire; this marked the first (and only) time a European colonizing power’s government actually operated out of one of its colonies.
The Rio de Janeiro merchants, businessmen, and politicians (and much of the Brazilian elites) were thrilled and proud, and not without reason – never before had an Eurpoean monarch visited a colony in the Americas, much less make it his or her home.
strong>Immediately after the Portuguese crown won the battle against Napoleon in 1821, King Dom João VI returned to Lisbon, leaving his oldest son — Dom Pedro I — as crown prince in his stead.
The Convention wanted to impose a North American style liberal democracy, whereas Pedro I — coming from an absolutist tradition — wanted a constitutional monarchy reflecting the French model.
In addition to a constitutional monarchy with the emperor as ruler, the first Magna Carta also established, for the first time, the separation of powers as one of its core components.
"… Officially, it was said that the framers of the constitution of the Republic, as then set out in Rio de Janeiro, seemingly and unconditionally copied the U.S. model either to enforce the liberal democratic enlightenment modernity, or to safeguard the economic well-understood interests of the nation.
From 1808 to 1822 as part of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and Algarves and from 1822 to 1889 as a the independent Empire of Brazil.
Napoleon's Continental Blockade created an interesting situation: the Portuguese court left Portugal to avoid the French troops and John VI transferred the capital of the Portuguese empire from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro.
The Prince Regent, the future Dom João VI of Portugal consented, and the royal family and nearly 10000 others boarded ships for their mysterious possession, Brazil.
Portugal and Dom João VI
In response, the capital of the viceroyalty was moved to Rio de Janeiro to be closer to Minas Gerais and offer an outlet to the sea.
The Braganzas in Brazil 1808-1821
The Atlantic crossing took roughly three months, and the royal family arrived in Salvador da Bahia on 22 January 1808.
Dom João introduced another favorable measure the following month, when the Portuguese court traveled to Rio de Janeiro.
Newspapers also appeared throughout the royal family’s stay, including the Gazeta do Rio de Janeiro.
Rio’s population in 1808 numbered around 60000.
Tension both in Europe and America stemmed from the royal family’s absolute power, as many called for a constitutional monarchy.
In addition, Portuguese liberals demanded the creation of a constitutional monarchy.
He came to regret his lack of formal schooling at the end of his life and made sure that his children, including the future Dom Pedro II were rigorously instructed.
In 1824, a national constitution was introduced, solidifying the government as a constitutional monarchy under Dom Pedro.
Tropical Versailles: Empire, Monarchy, and the Portuguese Royal Court in Rio de Janeiro, 1808-1821.
These reasons plus the political instability that marked the First Reign resulted in the abdication of the emperor in favor of his son, Dom Pedro II who was then five years old, in 1831.
Since a five-year-old child could not govern a nation, from 1831 to 1840 Brazil had representatives to govern in Dom Pedro II’s name, until he reached the majority age of 18.
It proclaimed the Republic of Bahia, and intended to stay like that until Dom Pedro II reached 18 years.
In an episode called Golpe da Maioridade, or majority coup, the end of the regency government was anticipated as Dom Pedro II, who was 14 years old then, was allowed to take the power.
The “coup” was in fact a declaration from the Senate that Dom Pedro II was already responsible enough to govern the country, and it's believed that it was made to contain the conflicts during the Regency Period.
In the second empire, under Dom Pedro II’s command, the conflicts decreased.
Two of the rebellions that had started in the Regency Period ended in the government of Dom Pedro II, and the only big conflict that the country had - apart from its involvement in the Paraguayan War - was the Revolução Praieira or Praieira Revolt, that occurred in Pernambuco in 1848, the year of the European revolutions.
Dom Pedro II was Brazil’s governor for almost 50 years, the largest time a person ever governed in the country.
This made the internal traffic increase for years, concentrated in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, the main coffee producing regions.
It was during Dom Pedro II government that Brazil got involved in the Paraguayan War, a conflict between Brazilians, Argentines, and Uruguayans against Paraguay.
Being produced in Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro, it only helped increase the economic and political power that large and small rural landowners have.
The large production of coffee started in Rio de Janeiro around 1830, and in the 1850s, the west of the state of São Paulo increased their production due to the favorable plantation conditions.
It was in the Southeast region, however, that it became economically important to the country, when it started to be planted in Rio de Janeiro, spreading through the region and getting to São Paulo's cities.
In Brazil, the church was subordinated to the Emperor, by the Beneplácito, which meant that the decisions from the Vatican had to be accepted by Dom Pedro II before they started being valid in the country.
In 1875, however, two bishops didn’t wait for Dom Pedro II's approval and followed the order straight from Pope Pius IX, punishing people from the church that practiced Freemasonry.
The Brazilian Empire (7 September 1822-15 November 1889) was a 19th-century state that encompassed the territories which form modern Brazil and Uruguay.
Founded after the declaration of independence from Portugal, the Brazilian Empire was led by Dom Pedro I and his son, Dom Pedro II.
The Brazilian Empire was declared on 7 September 1822 in the Brazilian Declaration of Independence, and on 12 October 1822 Dom Pedro I (the son of King Joao VI of Portugal) acceded the throne as the first Emperor.
he decided to give up his throne to his five-year-old son Dom Pedro II.
On 18 July 1841 Dom Pedro II was coronated, taking over the country for himself.
Under Dom Pedro II, Brazil returned to peace and stability after near-dissolution following the political crisis that followed his father's death, and Brazil became an emerging international power.
In the twilight years of Brazil, Dom Pedro II made no effort to support the monarchy, as he did not want it to continue past his lifetime.
