Exhumation  and  reburial of Richard III of England

Exhumation of Richard III of England
The exhumation of Richard III of England from his burial place within the former Greyfriars Friary Church in the city of Leicester, England, took place in September 2012.
His body was brought to Augustinian Greyfriars Friary in Leicester, where it was buried in a crude grave.
A search for Richard's body began in August 2012, initiated by Philippa Langley of the Richard III Society.
The dig was led by the University of Leicester working in partnership with Leicester City Council.
On the basis of these points and other historical, scientific and archaeological evidence, the University of Leicester announced on 4 February 2013 that it believed the skeleton was that of Richard III.
It was subsequently announced that Richard was to be reinterred at Leicester Cathedral in early 2014.
The discovery of Richard III
In August 2012, the University of Leicester in collaboration with the Richard III Society and Leicester City Council, began one of the most ambitious archaeological projects ever attempted: no less than a search for the lost grave of King Richard III.
On 4th February 2013, the University announced to the world's press that these were the remains of King Richard III.
Richard III: Leicester welcomes king's remains
King Richard III's remains have arrived at Leicester Cathedral ahead of his reburial.
He will finally be reinterred during a ceremony on Thursday.
The former king's coffin, which is made of English oak from a Duchy of Cornwall plantation, emerged during a ceremony at the University of Leicester.
Archaeologists, academics, researchers and descendants of Richard III's family, including Michael Ibsen who built the coffin, placed white roses on it during the ceremony.
The reburial procession began at Fenn Lane Farm, believed to be the closest spot to where the king was killed.
Ahead of the cortege arriving in Leicester, city mayor Peter Soulsby said: "It was from Leicester in 1485 that Richard rode out to battle and it was to Leicester that he returned, defeated, slung ignominiously across the back of a horse.
However, campaigners who petitioned for Richard III to be reburied in York have described the events in Leicester as a "pantomime".
Louise Hollingsworth wrote on Facebook: "The more I see of the undignified, money-grabbing pantomime surrounding King Richard III in Leicester this weekend, the more incensed I become."
A spokesman for Leicester Cathedral has confirmed that the Queen has written a greeting that will appear in the order of service at the reinterment but details of the message's content will not be released ahead of the event.
RICHARD III, King of England
RICHARD III, King of England, youngest son of Richard, Duke of York, by Cicely Neville, was born at Fotheringhay on the 2nd of October 1452.
Richard III, 16h century.
But the report of the princes' death was believed in England at the time, "for which cause king Richard lost the hearts of the people" (Chronicles of London, 191), and it was referred to as a definite fact before the French states-general in January 1484.
Joseph Kronheim's artwork on the Death of Richard III at Bosworth Field
After the battle his body was carried to Leicester, trussed across a horse's back, and buried without honour in the church of the Greyfriars.
Contacting King Richard III?
Amateur ghost hunters may have made contact with the spirit of Richard III.
Is this the 'voice of Richard III's ghost'?
Amateur ghost hunters claim they have made contact with the spirit of Richard III, next to the bed where the king reportedly spent his last night.
Members of the paranormal investigation group Haunted Heritage said they recorded the spooky encounter at Donington le Heath Manor House, Leicestershire, last year.
But they said they did not want to publicise the recording at the time because of the furore surrounding the discovery of the king's remains under a Leicester car park.
It is believed that King Richard III spent the night at the house before riding out to the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 and dying on the battlefield.
King Richard III was defeated by Henry Tudor and the battle is regarded as one of the most defining moments in British history.
Medium Gill Hibbert, 56, from Coalville, Leicestershire said: 'It was in the main room upstairs in the manor house - it was coming up to the witching hour.
Mrs Hibbert said: 'We're not saying it's Richard III.
We are being careful about saying it's Richard III because we can't prove it.'
His body was buried in what was Grey Friars Church, Leicester, after his death.
A legal row is now ongoing between those who want him re-interred at Leicester Cathedral and others who say he should be laid to rest at York Minster.
King Richard III laid to rest at Leicester Cathedral
A service to mark the reburial of King Richard III has taken place at Leicester Cathedral.
Historians identify 'spot where Richard III was killed in battle'
A pair of historians believe they have identified the spot where Richard III was killed in battle.
Through archaeological research and a study of the landscape, Curry and Foard have concluded Richard that was most likely killed at Fenn Lane, near Ambion Hill in Leicestershire.
Reburial of Richard III - As it happened
The reburial ceremony will take place at Leicester Cathedral today, led by Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury
When such links are given on this Facebook page it does not necessarily imply that the Richard III Society endorses the content of such sites.
Reburial of Richard III
Our plans for the reburial (reinterment) of King Richard III have been carefully thought through and developed over the past year by our team at Leicester Cathedral.
The ceremony took place almost certainly on 25 August, on the orders of the now King Henry VII, who we might imagine was anxious to leave Leicester and consolidate his new royal status.
If that has to take place, proper practice presumes reburial in the nearest consecrated ground.
Greyfriars and St Martins church were immediate neighbours in 1485, and St Martins, now a Cathedral, is now the nearest place for reburial.
Our draft reburial plans will involve a series of particular ‘moments’, which are to be spread out over several days starting on Sunday 22 March with the reinterment itself on Thursday 26 March.
The remains of King Richard III will be placed in a coffin in the University, and brought from there to the Cathedral in a dignified manner, with a public route that will reflect the movements of his final days.
The coffin will then lie at rest for a number of days, covered with a magnificent specially commissioned pall, which tells in pictures something of Richard’s personal story, and the public will be given the opportunity to visit and pay their respects to this one-time King of England.
The reburial itself will be the occasion of a special service, which will draw together all we know of medieval reinterment rites, but will also clearly be intelligible for a modern 21st century global audience.
The Cathedral church of Leicester and Leicestershire will then invite its many communities to join us as we celebrate this permanent resting place for the last of the Plantagenets, and all that this means for the story we tell every day into the future.
