Byzantine Empire

The Battle of Manzikert occurred on August 26, 1071 between the Byzantine Empire and Seljuk Turkish forces led by Alp Arslan, resulting in the defeat of the Byzantine Empire and the capture of Emperor Romanus IV Diogenes.
The region was dominated by the Byzantine Empire which sought to resist new barbarian invasions from north of the Danube.
Whilst the Avars, Bulgars and Slavs occupied the Balkans the Byzantine Empire reached its greatest extent under Justinian (527-565).
Byzantine Empire 602-800
The Byzantine Empire spent the 7th Century on the defensive in the Balkans while it fought most of its wars in the East resisting Sassanid and then Arab invasions.
His second son Symeon (893-927) fought a series of wars with the Byzantine Empire gaining Macedonia, Thessaly and Albania.
The invaders fell out over the spoils and a victorious Byzantine Empire (Battles of Arcadioplois 970 and Dorostalon 971) annexed all of Eastern Bulgaria up to the Danube in 972.
The Byzantine Empire was the dominant influence on the Balkans particularly in the South and at the end of this period was in revival.
She helped keep her husband, Emperor Justinian, in power and solidified the strength of the Byzantine Empire in the 6th century C.E. as the western Empire collapsed.
In fact, after the western part of the Roman Empire fell, the eastern half continued to exist as the Byzantine Empire for hundreds of years.
The End of the Byzantine Empire
The restored Byzantine Empire converted to Catholicism to get aid from the West against the Turks, but the Turks defeated them and established the Ottoman Empire.
Describe the political situation leading up to the Turkish conquest of the Byzantine Empire
The restored Byzantine Empire was surrounded by enemies.
On May 29, 1453 CE, Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks and the Byzantine Empire came to an end.
This empire also defeated Constantinople and the Byzantine Empire in 1453 CE.
The restored Byzantine Empire was surrounded by enemies.
United, the Turks became a much greater threat to the Byzantine Empire.
By 1400 CE, the Byzantine Empire was little more than the city-state of Constantinople.
The borders of the Byzantine and Ottoman Empires in the Eastern Mediterranean just before the fall of Constantinople in 1453 CE.
The Byzantine Empire Accepts Catholic Christianity
When the bishops returned to the Byzantine Empire, however, they found themselves under attack by their congregations.
The Fall of Constantinople
In 1453 CE, the Ottoman Turks besieged Constantinople.
On May 29, 1453 CE, Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks, the Byzantine emperor was killed, and the Byzantine Empire came to an end.
Yet in 1453 they fell to the Ottoman Turks.
These successes were compounded by more rebellions which broke out in the Byzantine Empire from provinces which tried to take advantage of the situation.
In 612, the Persian army, under the command of general Shahrbaraz, conquered Syria, cutting the Byzantine Empire in half.
After having the Byzantine Empire on the ropes, Khosrau had seen how dangerous it could still be.
The Byzantine Empire
Monasteries spread throughout the Byzantine Empire.
In Eastern Europe, missionaries traveled far beyond the boundaries of the Byzantine Empire.
The Fall of Constantinople
1453
The siege of Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire and one of the most heavily fortified cities in the world, took place in 1453.
The Fall of Constantinople.
The Byzantine period came to an end with the conquest of Istanbul in 1453 by the Turks.
The map shows the Byzantine Empire at its greatest extent in the 6th century.
The Ottomans captured Constantinople in 1453 during the reign of Sultan Mehmit II (1451-1481), and this capture ended the reign of the Byzantine Empire.
The Byzantine Empire
The Byzantine Empire was the predominantly Greek-speaking continuation of the Roman Empire during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Initially the eastern half of the Roman Empire (often called the Eastern Roman Empire in this context), it survived the 5th century fragmentation and collapse of the Western Roman Empire and continued to thrive, existing for an additional thousand years until it fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
Both "Byzantine Empire" and "Eastern Roman Empire" are historiographical terms applied in later centuries; its citizens continued to refer to their empire as the Roman Empire.
Between 324 and 330, Constantine I (r. 306-337) transferred the main capital from Rome to Byzantium, later known as Constantinople ("City of Constantine") and Nova Roma ("New Rome").
During the reign of Justinian I (r. 527-565), the Empire reached its greatest extent after reconquering much of the historically Roman western Mediterranean coast, including north Africa, Italy, and Rome itself, which it held for two more centuries.
During the Macedonian dynasty (10th-11th centuries), the Empire again expanded and experienced a two-century long renaissance, which came to an end with the loss of much of Asia Minor to the Seljuk Turks after the Battle of Manzikert (1071).
This volatile period led to its progressive annexation by the Ottomans over the 15th century and the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.
The Term "Byzantine Empire"
The name Byzantine Empire is derived from the original Greek name for Constantinople; Byzantium.
The term Byzantine Empire was invented in 1557, about a century after the fall of Constantinople by German historian Hieronymus Wolf, who introduced a system of Byzantine historiography in his work Corpus Historiae Byzantinae in order to distinguish ancient Roman from medieval Greek history without drawing attention to their ancient predecessors.
He perfected Constantine I's coin system by definitively setting the weight of the copper follis, the coin used in most everyday transactions.
The Age of Justinian I
The reign of Justinian I, which began in 527, saw a period of extensive Imperial conquests of former Roman territories (indicated in green on the map below).
The 6th century also saw the beginning of a long series of conflicts with the Byzantine Empire's traditional early enemies, such as the Persians, Slavs and Bulgars.
Theological crises, such as the question of Monophysitism, also dominated the empire.Justinian I had already probably exerted effective control under the reign of his predecessor, Justin I (518-527).
By far the most significant building of the Byzantine Empire is the great church of Hagia Sophia (Church of the Holy Wisdom) in Constantinople (532-37), which retained a longitudinal axis but was dominated by its enormous central dome.
Once the assaults were repelled, the empire's recovery resumed.In his landmark work The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, the 18th century historian Edward Gibbon depicted the Byzantine Empire of this time as effete and decadent.
However, by an alternate examination the Byzantine Empire can be regarded instead a military superpower of the early Middle Ages.
Ironically, re-conquering Anatolia may have saved the Empire in the long run.Map of the Byzantine Empire around year 1180.
The City of Constantinople in 1453
The Fall of Constantinople finally came after a two-month siege by Mehmed II on May 29, 1453.
Byzantine art is generally taken to include the arts of the Byzantine Empire from the foundation of the new capital of Constantinople (now Istanbul) in AD 330 in ancient Byzantium to the capture of the city by the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
The territory of the Byzantine Empire originally encompassed the entire eastern half of the Roman Empire around the Mediterranean Sea but shrank to little more than Greece, part of southern Italy, the southern Balkans, and Anatolia after the Islamic invasions of the 7th century.
These frescoes date from the decades around the fall of Constantinople to the Turks in 1453 and mark the end of Byzantine art as such.
Prime examples of early Byzantine architecture date from Justinian I's reign and survive in Ravenna and Istanbul, as well as in Sofia (the Church of St Sophia).
The period of the Macedonian dynasty, traditionally considered the epitome of Byzantine art, has not left a lasting legacy in architecture.
It is presumed that Basil I's votive church of the Theotokos of the Pharos and the Nea Ekklesia (both no longer existent) served as a model for most cross-in-square sanctuaries of the period, including the Cattolica di Stilo in southern Italy (9th century), the monastery church of Hosios Lukas in Greece (c. 1000), Nea Moni of Chios (a pet project of Constantine IX), and the Daphni Monastery near Athens (c. 1050).
The 11th-century monastery of Hosios Lukas in Greece is representative of the Byzantine art during the rule of the Macedonian dynasty.
At this time, however, during the reign of Emperor Justinian I the Great (527-65), centralized plans began to be used for congregational churches as well as for martyrs' shrines, probably because of the growing importance of the cult of relics.
Following the conquest of Constantinople by the Ottoman Turks in 1453, Sultan Mehmed II took the title "Kaysar-i-Rum" (the Turkish equivalent of Caesar of Rome), since he was determined to make the Ottoman Empire the heir of the Eastern Roman Empire.
Constantinople was the capital city of the Eastern Roman Empire.
The Theodosian walls are shown as the limits of the "Old City" according to modern maps [according to The Walls of Constantinople AD 324-1453, by Stephen R. Turnbull].
1176 and the fall of the Byzantine Empire
Was Manuel Komnenos to blame for the fall of the Byzantine Empire?
I'm going to argue the entire Komnenian restoration of the Byzantine Empire was a failure - and that the Komnenian system was deeply flawed.
The fact that the Turks could attack a crusader army at the very gates of Ephesus, at a time when the region was supposedly some 272 miles from the frontier at Philomelion near Iconium, shows how far the Byzantine Empire's fortunes had actually fallen.
The Komnenian restoration is supposed to have restored the empire's fortunes, with the three emperors Alexios I, John II and Manuel Komnenos considered among the greatest in the empire's history.
Everyone who knows anything about Byzantine history knows that the Anatolian themes established during the 7th century were the heartland of the Byzantine Empire.
To return to the Byzantine Empire.
The reforms that could have been made present one of the most tantalising 'what if' scenarios about the Byzantine Empire.
The reforms that could have been made present one of the most tantalising 'what if' scenarios about the Byzantine Empire.
Justinian I
Emperor Justinian I (Greek: F??
In 533 CE Justinian launched a reconquest effort aimed at claiming these areas for the Byzantine Empire.
Empire of Justinian I
Constantine I (Constantine the Great) was a Roman Emperor, proclaimed Augustus by his troops in 206.
The Byzantine Empire
In 1453, the Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople, thus bringing the 1,000-year Roman Empire to an end.
The people thought of themselves as Romans, but they were actually of the Byzantine Empire named after a Greek town of Byzantium.
Nearly all who lived in the Byzantine Empire were Christian.
Byzantine Empire
When the Roman Empire split into two separate empires, the Eastern Roman Empire became known as the Byzantine Empire.
The Byzantine Empire continued on for 1000 years after the Western Roman Empire, including Rome, collapsed in 476 CE.
The Byzantine Empire ruled most of Eastern and Southern Europe throughout the Middle Ages.
Emperor Constantine I came to power as emperor in 306 CE.
He made the Greek city of Byzantium the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire.
The peak of the Byzantine Empire occurred during the Justinian Dynasty.
In 527 Justinian I became Emperor.
Under Justinian I, the empire gained territory and would reach the peak of its power and wealth.
Finally, in 1453, Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Empire and with it came the end of the Byzantine Empire.
Fun facts about the Byzantine Empire
The official language of the Byzantine Empire was Latin until 700 CE when it was changed to Greek by Emperor Heraclius.
From the time of the early Roman Republic to the fall of the Byzantine Empire, Roman rule had a major impact on Europe for nearly 2000 years.
The Byzantine Empire
The Byzantine Empire (or Byzantium) was the direct continuation of the Roman Empire during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages, centered on the capital of Constantinople.
It is also referred to as the Eastern Roman Empire, primarily in the context of Late Antiquity, while the Western Roman Empire was still in existence.
The Palaiologans even managed to capture Constantinople in 1261, but the Byzantine Empire was now in decline.
It kept losing territory, until finally the Ottoman Empire (which had replaced the Sultanate of Rum) under Mehmet II conquered Constantinopel in 1453 and took over government.
Article: Byzantine Empire
Source: Byzantine Empire
The emperor’s palace, known as Daphne, which was located near the hippodrome, would later become the main palace of the Byzantine Empire.
Article: Byzantine Empire - Crysta...
By far the most significant building of the Byzantine Empire is the great church of Hagia Sophia (Church of the Holy Wisdom) in Constantinople (532-37), which retained a longitudinal axis but was dominated by its enormous central dome.
Article: Byzantine Empire - Crysta...
From its founding by Constantine the Great in 330 to its final fall on the morning of 29th May, 1453, the Byzantine Empire traversed one thousand one hundred and twenty-three years.
May 29th 1453, was a Tuesday; the day that Constantinople, the place they called—and often still call—the queen of cities, or simply “the city” was overrun by the Ottoman forces that had bombarded its mighty walls for the past 40 days.
If the European Union still hesitates, despite Turkey's decades inside NATO, about its wish for EU membership too, the real reasons lie centuries deep; not least in 1453.
Byzantine Empire
The origins of the great civilization known as the Byzantine Empire can be traced to 330 A.D., when the Roman emperor Constantine I dedicated a “new Rome” on the site of the ancient Greek colony of Byzantium.
The Byzantine Empire finally fell in 1453, after an Ottoman army stormed Constantinople during the reign of Constantine XI.
In 330 A.D., Roman Emperor Constantine I chose Byzantium as the site of a new Roman capital, Constantinople.
The citizens of Constantinople and the rest of the Eastern Roman Empire identified strongly as Romans and Christians, though many of them spoke Greek and not Latin.
One of the most extraordinary aspects of the Byzantine Empire was its longevity: It was the only organized state west of China to survive without interruption from ancient times until the beginning of the modern age.
Survival of the Byzantine Empire
As a result of these advantages, the Eastern Roman Empire–variously known as the Byzantine Empire or Byzantium–was able to survive for centuries after the fall of Rome.
The Byzantine Empire Under Justinian
Justinian I, who took power in 527 and would rule until his death in 565, was the first great ruler of the Byzantine Empire.
At the time of Justinian’s death, the Byzantine Empire reigned supreme as the largest and most powerful state in Europe.
In 634, Muslim armies began their assault on the Byzantine Empire by storming into Syria.
During the late 10th and early 11th centuries, under the rule of the Macedonian dynasty founded by Michael III’s successor, Basil, the Byzantine Empire enjoyed a golden age.
The Fall of the Byzantine Empire & Its Legacy
On May 29, 1453, after an Ottoman army stormed Constantinople, Mehmed triumphantly entered the Hagia Sophia, which would become the city’s leading mosque.
Emperor Constantine XI died in battle that day, and the decline and fall of the Byzantine Empire was complete.
In the centuries leading up to the final Ottoman conquest in 1453, the culture of the Byzantine Empire–including literature, art and theology–flourished once again, even as the empire itself faltered.
(This process would continue after 1453, when many of these scholars fled to Italy from Constantinople.)
BYZANTINE EMPIRE 324 - 1453
The Byzantine Empire was the predominantly Greek-speaking continuation of the Roman Empire during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Initially the eastern half of the Roman Empire, also known as Eastern Roman Empire, it survived the 5th century fragmentation and collapse of the Western Roman Empire and continued to thrive, existing for an additional thousand years until it fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
Both Byzantine Empire and Eastern Roman Empire are historiographic terms applied in later centuries; its citizens continued to refer to their empire as the Roman Empire.
Between 324 and 330, Constantine I (r. 306-337) transferred the main capital from Rome to Byzantium, later known as Constantinople (City of Constantine) and Nova Roma (New Rome).
During the reign of Justinian I (r. 527-565), the Empire reached its greatest extent after reconquer much of the historically Roman western Mediterranean coast, including north Africa, Italy, and Rome itself, which it held for two more centuries.
During the Macedonian dynasty (10th-11th centuries), the Empire again expanded and experienced a two-century long renaissance, which came to an end with the loss of much of Asia Minor to the Seljuk Turks after the Battle of Manzikert (1071).
This volatile period led to its progressive annexation by the Ottomans over the 15th century and the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.
The origin of the name “Byzantium” & “Byzantine Empire”
The name Byzantine Empire is derived from the original Greek name for Constantinople; Byzantium.
The term Byzantine Empire was invented in 1557, about a century after the fall of Constantinople by German historian Hieronymus Wolf, who introduced a system of Byzantine historiography in order to distinguish ancient Roman from Medieval Greek history without drawing attention to their ancient predecessors.
This is a year sometimes picked as the beginning of the Byzantine Empire.
Justinian I, who took power in 527 and would rule until his death in 565, was the first great ruler of the Byzantine Empire.
At the time of Justinian’s death, the Byzantine Empire reigned supreme as the largest and most powerful state in Europe.
In 634, Muslim armies began their assault on the Byzantine Empire by storming into Syria.
During the late 10th and early 11th centuries, under the rule of the Macedonian dynasty founded by Michael III’s successor, Basil, the Byzantine Empire enjoyed a golden age.
The fall of Byzantine Empire
On May 29, 1453, after an Ottoman army stormed Constantinople, Mehmed triumphantly entered the Hagia Sophia, which would become the city’s leading mosque.
Emperor Constantine XI died in battle that day, and the decline and fall of the Byzantine Empire was complete.
Shortly after the extended controversy over the Byzantine Iconoclasm, the Byzantine Empire would recover under the Macedonian Dynasty, starting in 867 CE.
It was under this dynasty that the Byzantine Empire would recover and become the most powerful state in the medieval world.
The time of the Macedonian Dynasty's rule over the Byzantine Empire is sometimes called the Byzantine Renaissance or the Macedonian Renaissance.
A long period of military struggle for survival had recently dominated the life of the Byzantine Empire, but the Macedonians ushered in an age when art and literature once again flourished.
The Macedonian Dynasty also oversaw the expansion of the Byzantine Empire, which went on the offensive against its enemies.
Map of Byzantine Empire 1025
