Donner Party

The wagons left in May 1846.
Encouraged to try a new, faster route across Utah and Nevada, they opted to take the Hastings Cutoff proposed by Lansford Hastings, who had never taken the journey with wagons.
The Cutoff required the wagons to traverse Utah's Wasatch Mountains and the Great Salt Lake Desert, and slowed the party considerably, leading to the loss of wagons, horses, and cattle.
The Donner party was part of a movement that was not just one wagon train that went wrong, but part of the whole country kind of looking to expand itself, looking to first, dream its own future, and then make it a reality.
And the Donner party — nobody on the wagon train really was to blame.
The Donner-Reed wagon train was made up of twenty vehicles and the party included George Donner (wife Tamsen and five children and a family friend, John Denton), Jacob Donner (wife Elizabeth and seven children), James Reed (wife Margaret and four children), Patrick Breen (wife Peggy and seven children and a family friend Patrick Dolan), William McCutcheon (wife Amanda and one child) and William Eddy (wife Eleanor and two children).
Also in the wagon train were three teamsters working for Donner (Noah James, Samuel Shoemaker and Jean-Baptise Trubode) and five people employed by Reed (Baylis Williams, Eliza Williams, Milton Elliott, James Smith and Walter Herron).
The wagon train also included two Germans known as Hardkoop and Wolfinger.
The Donner-Reed wagon train left Independence, Missouri, for Sutter's Fort in May, 1846.
He was busy attempting to persuade Oregon-bound emigrants to go to California by way of what became known as the Hastings Cutoff.
Hastings told George Donner and James Reed that three wagon trains had already opted for this route.
The Donner Party had made poor time so far and was already some way behind most of the other wagon trains travelling from Independence to Sutter's Fort.
When they found him he refused the offer of becoming the personal guide to the Donner wagon train.
It was therefore decided to send two men, Charles T. Stanton and William McCutcheon ahead to Sutter's Fort in order to purchase provisions for the wagon train.
However, by this time the rest of the 1846 wagon trains had long gone and were already in California.
They also fired several arrows at the wagon train and wounded some of the animals.
The others agreed and after much discussion it was decided that Reed should be banished from the wagon train.
Over the next three days the wagon train suffered repeated attacks from groups of warriors.
The surviving members of the wagon train now set about constructing a camp next to what later became known as Donner Lake.
However, over the next two days they succumbed to temptation and resorted to cannibalism.
It also became clear that the many of those still alive had resorted to cannibalism in order to survive.
The Donner Party was the worst disaster in wagon train history.
George would later take the lead of the so-called “Donner Party,” a group of westbound emigrants who became trapped in the Sierra Nevada Mountains during one of the most brutal winters on record.
There was just one problem: no one had ever traveled this “Hastings Cutoff” with wagons, not even Hastings himself.
Despite the Hastings Cutoff debacle, most of the Donner Party still managed to reach the slopes of the Sierra Nevada by early November 1846.
Nearly a dozen families had made up Donner wagon train, but only two—the Reeds and the Breens—managed to arrive in California without suffering a single death.
Each night violent thunderstorms broke over the wagon trains, scattering cattle and drenching the encampments.
On May 27th, the wagon train came to a standstill on the east bank of the Big Blue River, too swollen by rain to be forded.
Narrator: On July 20th, the wagon train reached the Little Sandy River.
Narrator: On August 22nd the 87 members of the Donner Party spilled out of the mountains, exhausted and shaken.
On February 19th, 1847, seven freezing, exhausted men of the first relief party struggled over the summit and came within sight of the lake.
On February 22nd, the first relief party started back.
When the first relief party left the lake, eight-year-old Patty Reed volunteered to stay behind to care for her three-year-old brother Thomas, who was too small to walk through the huge drifts.
Narrator: Two children had died and more were failing fast when the first relief party caught sight of something moving towards them through the trees.
Of the original 87 members of the party, only 47 survived.
The Donner Party was a wagon train of about 80 pioneers who set out for California from Independence, Missouri, in 1846.
Hoping to make the Sacramento Valley by autumn, they fell behind schedule after taking an untried shortcut through the Great Salt Lake Desert.
They set out for California in mid-April 1846, arrived in Independence, Missouri, on May 10, 1846, and left two days later.
On May 19, 1846, the Donners and Reeds joined a large wagon train captained by William H. Russell.
Part of this wagon train was a Mormon, Lavinia Jackson Murphy, 50, widow of Jeremiah Burns Murphy of North Carolina, who traveled with her seven children.
Thomas Rhoads and his “Mormon” family, with 12 wagons and 38 members, was part of this larger wagon train.
The Forlorn Hope party first resorted to cannibalism on December 26, 1846, during their escape from the high camps.
Many authors have placed the blame for the tragedy on Lansford Warren Hastings, an Ohio lawyer who promoted the ill-advised shortcut now known as the Hastings Cutoff.
Donner party, group of American pioneers stranded en route to California.
In the spring of 1846, a party led by George Donner and James F. Reed set off from Independence, Mo.
87 people started the Donner Party, only 48 survived... musta been a hell of a party!
@HalSparks Did you know the Donner Party is AKA the Donner-Reed Party?
This decision, which required them to cut a thirty mile road through Utah's Wasatch Mountains, would spell doom for almost half the emigrants.
In early September, as they crossed the eighty-mile long flats of the Great Salt Lake Desert in Utah, most of their cattle and oxen died; wagons and possessions had to be abandoned; and men and women were forced to carry their young children.
But the disastrous short cut and desert crossing had delayed them too long; the snow was already three feet deep, so they stayed at Truckee Lake, where they found one cabin from a previous wagon train and built two others to shelter themselves from the winter.
They also found wagon ruts, most likely from the Pioneer Palace, almost 150 years after it set out for California.
they got lost and resorted to cannibalism.
