England expects that every man will do his duty

The system of signalling called semaphore, is a good example.
The idea was so simple that it was not even necessary to use a machine - anybody with two arms could send a message by semaphore – the holding of flags was introduced simply to make the signals clearer.
British Admiral, Horatio Nelson, famously sent a message using flags at the beginning of the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805, shortly before dying in the battle itself.
In the past flags were also used for signalling on the railways.
Nowadays modern railway signalling signs are based on the old flag signalling system.
#OTDH 21 October 1805, 11.45am signal flags fly up VICTORY's halyards: ENGLAND EXPECTS THAT EVERY MAN WILL DO HIS DUTY
It houses the world famous warships HMS Victory, HMS Warrior and the Tudor-era Mary Rose.
The flagship of Admiral Horatio Nelson, Victory is most famous for the Battle of Trafalgar, where Nelson was shot and killed.
There is a plaque that captures Nelson’s famed proclamation at the Battle of Trafalgar ‘England expects that every man will do his duty.'
On 21 October 1805, the Franco-Spanish fleet came out of port, and Nelson’s fleet engaged them at the Battle of Trafalgar.
The battle was Britain’s greatest naval victory, but during the action Nelson, aboard HMS Victory, was fatally wounded on the deck of his flagship H.M.S. Victory by a French sharpshooter perched in the overhead ships’ masts.
The significance of the victory and his death during the pivotal battle led to his signal, “England expects that every man will do his duty”, being regularly quoted, paraphrased and referenced up to the modern day, along with his motto of “Palmam Qui Meruit Ferat”, Latin for “Let him who earns it, Bear the palm”.
The signal issued by Lord Nelson from the HMS Victory during the Battle of Trafalgar is famous for its patriotism and poignancy.
At the time of the Battle of Trafalgar, naval signals were read in the following order:
Following this order the flags on HMS Victory appeared as follows:
When Lord Nelson told his Signal Officer, Lieutenant Pasco, to make this signal, Nelson originally wanted “England confides that every man will do his duty”.
Lieutenant Pasco asked if he could substitute “expects” for “confides” because the first word was in the signal book and “confides” would have to be spelled out.
On board the deck of HMS Victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 - By a French sharpshooter
What was Nelson's signal ?
"England expects that every man will do his duty" - referenced up to the modern day - most famous signal in naval history
How was Nelson standing on the deck of HMS Victory when he was shot ?
How many British ships were at the Battle of Trafalgar ?
Where can we see HMS Victory ?
This month in history: Battle of Trafalgar
Just before midday, off Cape Trafalgar, Nelson made the famous signal using Popham's telegraphic code to his fleet of 33 ships, ‘England expects that eery man will do his duty’, and the fleet formed into the two columns.
Vice Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood led the HMS Royal Sovereign line of attack, Nelson’s HMS Victory the other.
HMS Victory collided with Redoutable, becoming tangled in its rigging.
Nelson died just before 4.30pm, while aboard HMS Victory, captained by Thomas Masterman Hardy (GCB), to whom Nelson uttered the famous words, 'Kiss me, Hardy' (which Hardy did, twice).
Nelson’s body was placed in a cask filled with brandy for preservation, and was transported to Gibraltar on HMS Victory, arriving on 28 October 1805.
There are certain phrases that conjure the very truth of an era: “England expects that every man will do his duty,” Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson signaled at the Battle of Trafalgar.
Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson
Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson, by Lemuel Francis Abbott
Battle of Trafalgar
Vice-Admiral Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson, Duke of Bronte (September 29, 1758 – October 21, 1805) was a British admiral famous for his participation in the Napoleonic Wars, most notably in the Battle of Trafalgar, where he lost his life.
In a famous incident, however, Nelson claimed he could not see the signal flags conveying the order, pointedly raising his telescope to his blind eye.
The Battle of Trafalgar - Death and burial
He was appointed commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean, and assigned to HMS Victory in May 1803.
On October 21, 1805, Nelson engaged in his final battle, the Battle of Trafalgar.
At daylight saw the Enemy's Combined Fleet from East to E.S.E.; bore away; made the signal for Order of Sailing, and to Prepare for Battle; the Enemy with their heads to the Southward: at seven the Enemy wearing in succession.
As the two fleets moved towards engagement, he then ran up a 31 flag signal to the rest of the fleet which spelled out the famous phrase "England expects that every man will do his duty."
The original signal that Nelson wished to make to the fleet was England confides that every man will do his duty (meaning, “is confident that they will”).
The signal officer asked Nelson if he could substitute the word 'expects' for 'confides' as 'expects' was included in the code devised by Sir Home Popham, whereas 'confides' would have to be spelled out letter by letter.
Nelson agreed, and the signal was run up Victory's mizzenmast.
Actually, Nelson's signal is usually given as "England expects that every man will do his duty".
