Chalukya Dynasty

Almost around the time when the Guptas were creating architectural heritage in northern India, another purposeful movement was taking place in the Deccan—a group of robust structures evolved from an earlier tradition of rock-cut shrines and came to be known as experiments in Brahmanical worship.
IN traditional historical narration, much of the history of ancient Indian architecture is preoccupied with the Gupta period.
There is a marked cultural ignorance of the ancient Deccan in popular reading.
Events happening largely in northern India have been written about for long, with the south receiving a marginal narrative.
While Brahmanical sources are engaged with northern and central India, the other regions remain in the periphery; the south remains almost a blank.
Almost around the time when the Guptas were creating architectural heritage in northern India, a purposeful movement was taking place in the Deccan—a group of robust structures evolved from an earlier tradition of rock-cut shrines and came to be known as experiments in Brahmanical worship.
It was Pulakesin I who shifted his capital from Aihole to Vatapi (Badami).
From the middle of the sixth century, and for almost 200 years, the Chalukyas of Badami held power over northern Deccan.
Around the same time, a group of cave temples at Badami was sculpted under the Chalukya rulers.
The Chinese traveller Hiuen-tsang, who visited the Chalukyan empire in 639 C.E., mentioned Pulakesin II (610-642 C.E.) as a conqueror of the Deccan.
Badami remained the Chalukya capital for almost two hundred years, from 540 C.E. to 757 C.E.
India
Badami Chalukyas
The Chalukyas formed a powerful dynasty which was founded by Pulakeshi I, who originated from a place called Vatapi (now known as Badami, in Bagalkot, Karnataka state).
At its height between the sixth and twelfth centuries the Chalukya kingdom ruled large areas of central and southern India, mostly towards the western coast.
The earliest dynasty, known as the 'Badami Chalukyas', ruled from their capital at Vatapi from the middle of the sixth century.
The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence when the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi declined, and they rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakeshi II.
The rule of the Chalukyas marks an important milestone in the history of southern India and a golden age in the history of Karnataka.
The political atmosphere in southern India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of the Badami Chalukyas.
For the first time, a southern Indian kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and Narmada rivers.
The Rashtrakuta Dynasty (Sanskrit: राष्ट्रकूट rāṣṭrakūṭa, Kannada: ರಾಷ್ಟ್ರಕೂಟ) had been a royal Indian dynasty ruling large parts of southern, central and northern India between the sixth and the thirteenth centuries.
The clan that ruled from Elichpur had been a feudatory of the Badami Chalukyas and during the rule of Dantidurga, it overthrew Chalukya Kirtivarman II and went on to build an impressive empire with the Gulbarga region in modern Karnataka as its base.
That clan came to be known as the Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta, rising to power in South India in 753.
At the same time the Pala Dynasty of Bengal and the Prathihara dynasty of Gujarat gained force in eastern and northwestern India respectively.
Chalukya dynasty
Chalukya dynasty, Chalukya also spelled Calukya, either of two ancient Indian dynasties.
The Western Chalukyas ruled as emperors in the Deccan (i.e., peninsular India) from 543 to 757 ce and again from about 975 to about 1189.
The Eastern Chalukyas ruled in Vengi (in eastern Andhra Pradesh state) from about 624 to about 1070.
Pulakeshin I, a petty chieftain of Pattadakal in the Bijapur district whose reign began in 543, took and fortified the hill fort of Vatapi (modern Badami) and seized control of the territory between the Krishna and Tungabhadra rivers and the Western Ghats.
Pulakeshin II (reigned c. 610–642) acquired parts of Gujarat and Malwa and defied the north Indian ruler Harsa of Kannauj; the boundary between them was fixed on the Narmada River.
About 624, Pulakeshin II took the kingdom of Vengi from the Vishnukundins and gave it to his brother Kubja Vishnuvardhana, the first Eastern Chalukya ruler.
In 641–647 the Pallavas ravaged the Deccan and captured Vatapi, but the Chalukya family recovered by 655 and extended its power in Gujarat.
When the last Rashtrakuta fell, about 975, Taila founded the second Western Chalukya dynasty, named for the more central capital, Kalyani.
The Chola king Rajaraja I invaded the south Deccan about 993, and repeated Chola invasions of the plateau occurred until about 1021.
After many vicissitudes the Chalukya dynasty was supplanted by the Kalacuri family under Bijjala, who usurped the throne about 1156 and reigned until 1167.
The Chalukya dynasty was restored in the person of Someshvara IV, who, however, lost the empire in 1189 to the Yadavas (or Sevunas) of Devagiri, the Hoysalas of Dorasamudra, and the Kakatiyas of Warangal—the rulers of the Telugu-speaking parts of the Deccan.
The descendants of Kubja Vishnuvardhana had to constantly fight for the riches of Vengi and were pawns in the struggle between the Chalukya Deccan emperors and the Chola kings.
History of the Chalukyas of Badami
Read this article to learn about the History of the Chalukyas of Badami !
By the mid-sixth century A.D. the Vakatakas were supplanted by the Chalukyas of Badami as the major power in the Deccan.
The Chalukyas began with a base in northern Mysore at Vatapi or Badami and the adjacent Aihole, from where they moved northward and annexed the former kingdom of the Vakatakas, which was centred around Nasik and the upper Godavari.
Pulakesin I (550-566) was the real fouder of the Chalukya dynasty of Badami.
He made Badami or Vatapi as his capital.
With the expeditions of Pulakesin II, the Chalukyas became the paramount power in the Deccan, as the Western Gangas and the Alupas in the South and the Latas, Malavas and Gurjaras in the north offered their submission to him.
His first expedition against the Pallava kingdom, which was then ruled by Mahendravarman I was a complete success, and he annexed Vengi, the northern most territory of the Pallavas, lying between the mouths of the Krishna and Godavari.
Thus, begin the line of the Chalukyas of Vengi or Eastern Chalukyas.
On account of the growing power of Pulakesin II and the trade relations with India, the Iranian king Khusrau II sent an ambassador to Badami in return for the ambassador sent by Pulakesin to Iran in 625 A.D.
The last Chalukyan ruler Kirtivarman II (744-745 A.D.) was defeated by one of their feudatories, Dantidurga, the founder of the Rashtrakuta dynasty, and thus came an end to the Chalukya dynasty of Badami.
The Chalukyas of Badami developed the Deccan or Vesara style in the building of structural temples, which reached culmination, however, only under the Rashtrakutas and the Hoysalas.
The temple-building activity under the Chalukyas of Badami can be broadly divided into two stages.
The first stage is represented by the temples at Aihole and Badami.
Of the temples at Badami, the Melagitti Sivalaya is a small but finely proportioned and magnificently located temple.
A group of four rock-cut halls (one Jaina and three of them Hindu) at Badami are all of the same type.
During the 6th and the 8th century, the empire that ruled the Deccan region of India was the Chalukya dynasty.
Eastern Chalukyas: Ruled from the Vengi region
Western Chalukyas: Ruled from the Badami region
The Chalukya dynasty is famous for developing and encouraging art and architecture during its era.
The rulers of the Chalukya dynasty were great enthusiasts of art.
This is evident from the fact that they built many temples near the region of Badami.
This dynasty was a branch of the Chalukyas of Badami.
Pulakesin II, the renowned ruler of Chalukyas conquered Vengi (near Eluru) in A.D.624 and installed his brother Kubja Vishnuvardhana (A.D.624–641) as its ruler.
In the meanwhile, the Rashtrakutas of Malkhed ousted Chalukyas of Badami.
The weak rulers of Vengi had to meet the challenge of the Rashtrakutas, who overran their kingdom more than once.
Rashtrakutas again attacked the Vengi kingdom during this period but were repulsed effectively by Vengi and came to an understanding with Rashtrakutas and treated them as his allies.
But the extermination of the Chalukyas of Badami by the Rashtrakutas gave respite to the Pallavas to consolidate their power.
The Cholas attained the status of a major power in south India under the valiant leadership of Rajaraja I (A.D.985–1016).
Rajaraja I utilised the claim of one of these princes, Saktivarma, as a pretext for intervening in the affairs of Vengi.
He was successful in seating Saktivarma on the throne of Vengi and, from that time, the Eastern Chalukyas played a role subservient to the Cholas.
But the Telugu country became a cockpit of battles between the Cholas and the Chalukyas of Kalyani who supported a rival claimant to the throne of the Vengi each time.
An Eastern Chalukya Prince, Rajendra, occupied the Chola throne in A.D. 1070 under the name of Kulottunga I. Nevertheless, Vijayaditya VII, a cousin of Rajaraja, continued to rule over Vengi till his death in A.D.1076 when the Eastern Chalukya dynasty came to an end.
Chalukya Dynasty: The Mighty Rulers of Southern and Central India
Large parts of Southern and Central India were under the reign of the Chalukya Dynasty between 6th and 12th Century.
However, the Badami Chalukyas are the oldest of the three.
It was the most famous Chalukya King- Pulakesi -2 under whose rule the Badami Chalukyas rose to prominence.
With the rule of the Chalukya Dynasty South India saw the golden age of trade, commerce and architecture.
The Nagara style of Northern Indian architecture got mixed with the Dravida Style of the Southern India.
The Badami cave inscriptions of Mangalesa 578 CE , Kappe Arabhatta record of 700 CE, Peddavaduguru inscription of Pulakesi II, the Kanchi Kailasanatha Temple inscription and Pattadakal Virupaksha Temple inscription of Vikramaditya II are some of the popular inscriptions to give hints about the origin of the Badami Chalukyas.
Badami Chalukyas
Pulakesi 1 established his rule in the Vatapi (Badami) area of the South India in present day Karnataka and eventually extended his rule to the northern extents of the Pallava Kingdom.
Pulakesi -2 then extended the Chalukya kingdom by gaining control of the South-Eastern Deccan.
The Badami Chalukyas went into a period of decline following the death of Pulakesi.
Defeat of the Chalukya King- Kirtivarman-2 at the hands of the Rashtrakuta King Dantidurga in 753 CE marked the end of the rule of Badami Chalukyas.
Tailapa-2 who was a feudatory the Rashtrakutas captured much of the Westren Deccan and established the Chalukya Empire again.
He established his own era called Vikram Era and was instrumental in putting an end to domination of Cholas in Vengi.
Chalukyas of Vengi
After the end of the rule of the Badami Chalukyas, The battle for rule was initiated between the Rashtrakutas, the Western Chalukyas and the Eastern Chalukyas
After his demise, the Rashtrakutas gained control of Vengi again.
After the death of Darnarnava, the Eastern Chalukyan King, the Telugu king Bhima ruled the Vengi region for over 23 years and the two sons of Darnavarna were given a shelter by the Cholas in their Kingdom.
This helped them form an alliance with the Cholas and with their assistance Saktivarman I, the elder son of Danarnava was crowned as the ruler of Vengi in 1000 CE though the original control lied with the Chola King Rajaraja Chola 1.
It was a royal dynasity that ruled southern and central India through the 6th to the 12th century.
During this period, they ruled as three related, but individual dynasties.The earliest dynasty known as the Badmi Chalukyas ruled from Vatapi (modern Badami) from the middle of the 6th century.
In 550 Pulakesi I established the Chalukya dynasty.
He took Vatapi (Badami in Bagalkot district, Karnataka) under his control and made it his capital.The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence at the decline of the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi and rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakesi II (609 – 642) C.E.
After the death of Pulakesi II, the Eastern Chalukyas became an independent kingdom in the eastern Deccan.
They ruled from their capital Vengi until about the 11th century.
In the western Deccan, the rise of the Rashtrakutas in the middle of 8th century eclipsed the Chalukyas of Badami before being revived by their descendants, the Western Chalukyas, in late 10th century.
The political atmosphere in South India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of Badami Chalukyas.
For the first time, a South Indian kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and the Narmada rivers.
The rule of the Badami Chalukya was a period of religious development.
They enthusiastically encouraged Jainsm and confirmed to by one of the Badami cave temples and other Jain temples in the Aihole complex.
He then defeated the Vishnukundins in the southeastern Deccan.
Pallava Narasimhavarman however reversed this victory by attacking and occupying the Chalukya capital Vatapi (Badami).
The Badami Chalukya dynasty went in to a brief decline following the death of Pulakesi II due to internal feuds.
It recovered during the reign of Vikramaditya I, who succeeded in pushing the Pallavas out of Badami and restoring order to the empire.
After the rise of the Rashtrakutas the Chalukyas of Badami went in to an eclipse to be recovered in the tenth century C.E. by Tailapa II (973 – 997) C.E.
They were in constant conflict with the Imperial Cholas over the control of the Eastern Chalukya kingdom of Vengi.
The historic capital of Chalukya dynasty 1500 years ago, Badami in Karnataka, held a mammoth Devi Banashankari...
