1981 Irish hunger strike

For many years, this was the epicentre of the Northern Irish war, the front line where 53 republican prisoners engaged in two hunger strikes, the second of which, in 1981, resulted in the deaths of 10 men.
The catalyst was the Fermanagh and South Tyrone byelection on April 9 1981: Bobby Sands, then in his sixth week of hunger strike, stood as an Anti-H-Block/ Armagh Political Prisoner and won with more than 30,000 votes.
It was a turning point in Northern Ireland's war that culminated last April when Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams called on the IRA to commit to "purely political and democratic activity", a resolve he underlined two weeks ago at the party's annual conference.
The Provisional IRA came to the fore and stepped up the campaign against the Northern Ireland security forces and British troops.
By 1976 it had expanded into eight H-shaped blocks with a capacity for nearly 800 men.
In 1972, Billy McKee, an IRA prisoner at Long Kesh, initiated the first hunger strike.
In 1976, as the H-blocks were filling up, the Wilson Labour government reversed this decision.
Kieran Nugent, a 19-year-old republican, in September 1976 was the first to be denied special category status.
He was left naked but for a blanket; so began the "blanket protest".
The protest escalated in March 1978 when prisoners were told to remove the towels wrapped around them when they went to slop out.
On October 27 1980, the first hunger strike began.
It ended 53 days later, on December 18, following an appeal from the Catholic Primate of Ireland, on the assumption that the British government would make some concessions to the prisoners.
Three months later, on March 1 1981, Bobby Sands, OC of the IRA in Long Kesh, began the second hunger strike; the blanket protest was called off the day after, to avoid detracting attention from him.
In 1976, aged 19, McKeown was charged with causing explosions and the attempted murder of a Royal Ulster Constabulary man; he got life.
McMullan arrived in Long Kesh in September 1976.
"It was September 1976 and the longest anyone was in was five years.
The first hunger strikers had what became known as the Five Demands: the right not to wear prison uniform, the right not to do penal work, the right to associate freely with other prisoners, the right to get one visit, one letter and one parcel a week, and the restoration of the remission lost on protest.
Under Secretary to the Northern Ireland Office Sir Kenneth Stowe said, "Northern Ireland is not a place to grow martyrs if you can avoid it.
Within days of the end of the hunger strike, James Prior, Northern Ireland secretary, announced a series of measures that went a long way to meeting the five demands.
If that had been the mission in 1976, many lives would have been saved.
2 Lean Days and Uphill Battles (1976–1977) (pp. 20-41)
3 Steps in the Right Direction (1978–1979) (pp. 42-73)
Speaking at a New Year’s Day demonstration organized by the Derry Relatives Action Committee, a relative of a local prisoner claimed that 1978 would be the year for the prisoners.
4 Building the Campaign (1980) (pp. 74-91)
As journalist Kevin Kelley noted, ‘[t]he process of building a broad … front, which was begun at Coalisland in early 1978, finally reached fruition late in 1979’.
² While 1980 kicked off with yet another large anti-H-Block march, this time it was under the banner of the newly formed National H-Block Committee.
5 Hunger Strike (October–December 1980) (pp. 92-108)
At a press conference held on 13 October 1980, the chairman of the National H-Block Committee ‘said that every effort would be made to make the hunger strike unnecessary’.
6 Bobby Sands MP (January–April 1981) (pp. 109-127)
The Derry ‘Smash H-Block’ Committee warned of a second hunger strike ‘unless the Government ceases at once in playing toady to the prejudices and bigotry of a few petty-minded bureaucrats at the Northern Ireland Office’.
7 Ten Men Dead (May–October 1981) (pp. 128-156)
When asked about the surprise result, Thatcher acknowledged that it ‘show[ed] just how sharp are the divisions between the two communities in Northern Ireland’.
8 A Quiet and Uneventful End (October 1981–October 1982) (pp. 157-173)
The men of the H-Blocks formally ended their hunger strike protest on Saturday, 3 October 1981; it had lasted a gruelling 217 days.
The hunger strikes transformed the political context of the Northern Ireland problem.
Bew and Gillespie (1993) Northern Ireland A Chronology of the Troubles 1968-1993
The choice of the date was significant because it marked the fifth anniversary of the ending of special category status (1 March 1976).
It later became clear that the IRA leadership outside the prison was not in favour of a new hunger strike following the outcome of the 1980 strike.
The strike was to last until 3 October 1981 and was to see 10 Republican prisoners starve themselves to death in support of their demands.
A passage from a speech he had made at his inauguration as Lord Mayor was to be recalled during the 1981 hunger strike: "It is not those who can inflict the most, but those who can suffer the most who will conquer".
Just how much impact the 1981 strike was having on the Nationalist population of Ireland became clear when Bobby Sands was elected a Member of Parliament (MP) during a by-election for the Fermanagh / South Tyrone seat and two other hunger strikers were elected as Teachta Dáil (TDs) in a general election in the Republic of Ireland.
The hunger strike ended on 3 October 1981 when those Republican prisoners who had still been refusing food decided to end their hunger strike.
On 6 October 1981 James Prior, then Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, announced a series of measures which went a long way to meeting many aspects of the prisoners' five demands.
The hunger strike of 1981 had very important and far-reaching consequences for Northern Ireland and proved to be one of the key turning points of 'the Troubles'.
The Republican movement had achieved a huge propaganda victory over the British government and had obtained a lot of international sympathy.
Political support for Sinn Féin (SF) was demonstrated in two by-elections (and the general election in the Republic of Ireland) and eventually led to the emergence of SF as a significant political force in Northern Ireland.
The British government's fear that SF would overtake the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) as the main representative of the Catholic population of Northern Ireland was a key reason for the government signing the Anglo-Irish Agreement (AIA) on 15 November 1985.
The blanket protest was part of a five-year protest during the Troubles by Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) and Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) prisoners held in the Maze prison (also known as "Long Kesh") in Northern Ireland.
The republican prisoners' status as political prisoners, known as Special Category Status, had begun to be phased out in 1976.
Convicted paramilitary prisoners were treated as ordinary criminals until July 1972, when Special Category Status was introduced following a hunger strike by 40 IRA prisoners led by the veteran republican Billy McKee.
[1] In 1976, as part of the policy of "criminalisation", the British Government brought an end to Special Category Status for paramilitary prisoners in Northern Ireland.
The policy was not introduced for existing prisoners, but for those convicted after 1 March 1976.
[2] The end to Special Category Status was a serious threat to the authority which the paramilitary leaderships inside prison had been able to exercise over their own men, as well as being a propaganda blow.
[1] The imminent withdrawal of Special Category Status caused relations between the prisoners and prison officers to deteriorate, and in early 1976 the IRA leaders in prison sent word to the IRA Army Council asking them to begin assassinating prison officers, stating "we are prepared to die for political status.
[3] Outside the prison the IRA responded by shooting prison officer Patrick Dillon in April 1976, the first of nineteen prison officers to be killed during the five-year protest.
The blanket protest began on 14 September 1976 when newly convicted prisoner Kieran Nugent refused to wear prison uniform.
[2] Nugent had previously been interned in the compounds of Long Kesh during 1975, but was arrested in May 1976 and received a three-year sentence after being convicted of possessing weapons and hijacking a car.
In March 1978 some prisoners refused to leave their cells to shower or use the lavatory because of attacks by prison officers, and were provided with wash-hand basins in their cells.
At the end of April 1978 a fight occurred between a prisoner and a prison officer in H-Block 6.
This resulted in the blanket protest escalating into the dirty protest, as the prisoners were unable to "slop out" (i.e., empty their chamber pots) so resorted to smearing excrement on the walls of their cells.
On 27 October 1980, IRA members Brendan Hughes, Tommy McKearney, Raymond McCartney, Tom McFeeley, Sean McKenna, Leo Green, and INLA member John Nixon,[9] began a hunger strike aimed at restoring political status for paramilitary prisoners by securing what were known as the "Five Demands":
[10] In January 1981 it became clear that the prisoners' demands had not been conceded.
On 4 February the prisoners issued a statement saying that the British government had failed to resolve the crisis and declared their intention of "hunger striking once more".
[11] The 1981 Irish hunger strike began on 1 March when Bobby Sands refused food, and by the time the strike ended on 3 October, ten men, including Sands, had starved to death.
[12] Two days later, the incoming Northern Ireland Secretary, James Prior, announced a number of changes in prison policy, including that from then on all paramilitary prisoners would be allowed to wear their own clothes at all times.
Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike
In 1981 ten men starved themselves to death inside the walls of Long Kesh prison in Belfast.
This is, without a doubt, one of the most harrowing and detailed accounts of the Irish Hunger Strike of the early 1980's that I have read to date.
Although he does note that no one can actually be objective about the Troubles.
I chose to read this book because during one of my last trips to Gaza, I met one of the men who was supposed to join the 1981 Irish hunger strike.
He didn't, because it was finally called off after 10 men died in their struggle to force the British government to treat them as political prisoners rather than "common" criminals.
This is a journalistic account of the 1981 IRA Hunger Strikes, detailing with a keen eye the struggles of the prisoners and their families, the impact this had on the politics of Northern Ireland, and drawing parallels with earlier Irish struggles.
The Spring and Summer of 1981 had the world riveted as ten Irishmen starved themselves to death rather than wear prison clothing.
Ten Men Dead offers very good insight into the 1980 Maze Hunger Strike.
Recommends it for: History Buffs/People interested in Northern Ireland
If you are interested in the 1980 Hunger Strikers in Northern Ireland, this is definitely a book for you.
This is a magnificent book about the Republican hunger strikes of 1981 in Northern Ireland.
In my view a must read if you’re interested in the conflict in Northern Ireland.
I was recently in Ireland/Northern Ireland, and it seems that the peace process has worked, but I wonder if that's a superficial face put on for the tourists.
Looks at the 1981 Irish Hunger Strikes from the view of the Republican Movement.
One of the most accurate and riveting accounts of the 1981 Hunger Strike in the North of Ireland.
This study analyzes the unique event in the Northern Ireland history: the 1981 Hunger Strike.
For more than two decades Northern Ireland has suffered the high social cost of a violent political conflict.
It is held neither by those who challenge the foundations of the Northern Ireland state,[1] nor by those communities which are tolerant if not supportive of those labeled as 'terrorists.'
In Northern Ireland, these activities include establishing the right to engage in self-policing/' popular justice' activities, to violently oppose agents of the state,[4] and to receive conditions and status of imprisonment befitting adversaries of the state.
The hunger strike was a legitimacy crisis for the state of Northern Ireland.
Since the mid 1970s, the British government has pursued a variety of strategies as part of its general response to the Northern Irish conflict.
It undermined the entire strategy the British Government had adopted, and it offered an alternative interpretation of the nature of the conflict, the nature of the British presence in Northern Ireland, and the nature of the Northern Ireland state itself.
The 1981 hunger strike was also pivotal to the Northern Irish conflict in several other respects.
Finally, it brought media attention to Northern Ireland as never before,[10] generating coverage that was often very critical of the British Government's role in Northern Ireland.
Approximately 60 percent of Northern Ireland's population of 1.5 million are Protestants.
In general, Protestants, through their allegiance to the British Crown and their support for the political union between Northern Ireland and Great Britain, are referred to as Loyalists and Unionists.
Prior to the division of Ireland into the two states of Northern Ireland and the Irish Free State (the latter becoming the Republic of Ireland in 1949), Unionists were concentrated in the northeastern corner of the island.
The British Government tried to alleviate the situation by introducing the 1920 Government of Ireland Act which made provisions for two parliaments in Ireland: one would govern the six communities that now constitute Northern Ireland while the other would control the remainder of the island, 26 counties in all.
On this basis, the state of Northern Ireland was formed.
Two considerations, however, heavily influenced the geographical shape Northern Ireland took.
Thus of the six counties that eventually comprised Northern Ireland, two had strong Unionist majorities, two had slight Unionist majorities, and the remaining two had slight Nationalist majorities.
This guaranteed Northern Ireland a Unionist majority, but the presence of a disenchanted Nationalist minority ensured that Northern Ireland's existence would be a troubled one, with political rule being achieved, if not through coercion, then at least without a consensus.
Between 1956 and 1962 the Irish Republican Army engaged in a campaign directed against military installations throughout Northern Ireland.
The violence continued to escalate and the British Army was ordered into Northern Ireland on August 14, 1969.
Interment and Special Category Status
It had also been previously introduced in Northern Ireland in 1922 and 1957, once again to counter threat posed by militant republicanism (Kelley 1990).
Republicans had expected the introduction of internment for some time, for, despite the misgivings of military commanders, politicians in Northern Ireland were openly in favor of it.
These killings led to an upsurge of violence that prompted the Northern Ireland government to brush aside the Army's reservations.
Simultaneously, the British government was in the process of trying to negotiate a cease-fire with the leadership of the Provisional IRA.
To appease the IRA leadership and to maintain the cease-fire negotiations that would certainly have collapsed in the face of a hunger striker's death, the British government agreed to the prisoners' demands, and in 1972 they granted certain convicted prisoners special category status.
For the British Government the political gamble with the Provisional IRA, their agreeing to a cease-fire in return for Special Category Status must have appeared a seductive solution to almost insurmountable and escalating problems.
However, special category status was to create more problems for the British Government than it would solve, by lending legitimacy to groups whose members received it, and with its removal leading to the 1980 and 1981 hunger strikes.
The difficulties that arose from this status led William Whitelaw, then Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and responsible for its creation, introduction, and implementation, later to regret his actions.
As the British government realized that the conflict could continue indefinitely, the political costs of giving special category to those who challenged the foundations of the state increased.
Drawing heavily upon the arguments in the Gardiner report, the British government implemented the 'criminalization' policy.
The criminalization policy meant that paramilitary prisoners convicted of political violence related offenses committed after March 1, 1976 would be treated as ordinary criminals rather than being given special status.
In response to the criminalization policy, prisoners in the Maze engaged in various protests between 1976 and 1981.
These protests included a 'blanket protest'-where inmates refused to wear prison uniforms, choosing instead to drape themselves in their blankets- and the 'dirty protest'-where prisoners smeared their excreta on their cell walls.
( Coogan 1980).
The violence that characterized relations within the prison led paramilitary organizations to initiate a new policy of killing prison officers, of whom 18 were killed between 1976 and 1980.
In 1980, frustrated by their lack of success against the criminalization policy and feeling unable to continue the blanket and dirty protests indefinitely, a group of Republican prisoners went on hunger strike.
Seven Republican prisoners began this strike, first refusing food on October 27, 1980.
The strike continued for 53 days when, as one of the hunger strikers was close to death, the prisoners agreed to a settlement allegedly offered by the British government.
They ended their strike on December 18, 1980.
In fact, the British government, for its part, denied that any significant concessions to the prisoners had been made.
The Republican prisoners claimed that the British government was reneging on its promises, and they announced that a second hunger strike would begin on March 1, 1981, the fifth anniversary of the introduction of internment.
The hunger strikes were directed against both the British government (1913-22) and the Irish Free State authorities (1923).
In the case of the 1981 Hunger Strike, the prison conditions could have operated as a safety valve.
A sophisticated British government could have defused the situation quite easily and avoided a confrontation between itself as unyielding colonial power and a group of defenseless political prisoners, which is how it largely came to be seen internationally.
The first hunger strike having ended, they would not have been acting under duress if they had allowed for some new arrangements on the specifics of prison conditions.
But as the prisoners pressed for a second hunger strike they knew that this time not only would some of them have to die but also that they were engaging in a fight with the British government.
Most of the following May and June, eighty prisoners embarked on a second hunger strike, insisting on treatment equal to that of other inmates (but not on integration with them) and on free information.
On 16 April 1981, Sigur Debus died after being on hunger strike for 70 days, thus providing the 'hard-left' with another martyr.
The 1981 Hunger Strike
This Irish hunger strike began with Bobby Sands, who had been the chief negotiator between the first hunger strikers and prison officials, being the first prisoner to refuse food.
Initially, the hunger strike was a low-key affair, and perhaps it would have remained so except for the death of Frank Maguire, the incumbent Member of Parliament for Northern Ireland constituency of Fermanagh-South Tyrone.
This victory brought the hunger strike to the world's attention as the media converged on Northern Ireland.
Despite the enormous amounts of media coverage the hunger strikers received due to their electoral success, the British government was determined not to give in.
Bobby Sands was the first hunger striker to die after 66 days without nourishment.
In the face of an intransigent British government, these relatives feared that their sons or brothers would die for nothing.
Realizing the futility of their position, the remaining hunger strikers abandoned their protest on October 3, 1981.
The ten prisoners who died were not the only casualties of the hunger strike.
The 1981 hunger strike was a legitimacy crisis for the Northern Irish State.
As well as undermining the criminalization policy, the hunger strike exposed the inconsistencies of the British government's approach to the Northern Irish conflict.
The British government had enacted 'special' legislation, 'special' courts, and a variety of other procedures specifically for dealing with the conflict; furthermore, the prison population in Northern Ireland had increased from just over 600 in 1967 to almost 3,000 in 1978.
In 1976 the British government tried to criminalise the republican prisoners.
In 1981 the republican prisoners criminalised the British government.
The IRA went on to say that it had come under pressure from members and supporters 'who believe that the IRA should pay the British government in kind for the deaths of comrades and for the deaths on the streets.
Thatcher had featured in 'Wanted for Murder' posters in 1981.
There is a substantial literature on the subject of media coverage of the Northern Ireland conflict.
Kevin Kelley (1990, p.230) wrote that the 1981 'hunger strike has undoubtedly been the major news story' to emerge from the conflict in Northern Ireland.
The 1981 hunger strike lasted a total of 217 days, beginning on March 1 and ending on October 3.
A basic premise of the criminalization policy was that paramilitary organizations such as the Provisional IRA lacked popular support in Northern Ireland.
The New York Times called Sand's election a 'stunning blow to the Protestant establishment of Northern Ireland.'
The Times completely ignored the implications of Sand's electoral success for the criminalization policy, for public perceptions of the Provisional IRA, and the entire Northern Ireland conflict.
It was a propaganda victory for the leadership of the Republican movement, an embarrassment for the British government, a blow to political moderates in Northern Ireland, and a procedural issue for the British parliament in deciding whether or not he should be expelled.
The general picture created by the Irish Times was that the hunger strikers were a result of the Northern Ireland conflict, not a cause of it as the Times suggested.
This expansion of the security forces' powers has severely infringed on the civil liberties of the general population (Boyle 1980, 1982).
It is not my purpose to argue that convicted members of paramilitary organizations should be accorded a status different from that of ordinary prisoners, but the 1981 hunger strike clearly demonstrated the limits of the criminalization policy.
(Burton 1979, 1978).
Did the 1981 hunger strike exemplify the alleged irrationality and pathology of terrorism or was it one of the 'struggles for legitimacy' that Burton suggested characterized the relationship between militant Republicanism and the Nationalist community?
Burton noted that these strategies can take several forms, but they have been especially visible in the official reports of committees investigating controversial events in Northern Ireland.
Bobby Sands was 27 years old when he lost his life during the 1981 hunger strike, protesting the end to “political prisoner” status for IRA prisoners.
On his release in 1976, Sands returned to his original role with his local IRA unit as well as working to tackle the social issues that faced the Twinbrook area as a community activist.
By this time, the “political prisoner” status of those charged with acts of terrorism had been removed, sparking five years of protest by convicted paramilitary prisoners.
The withdrawal of “Special Category Status” meant that these prisoners were no longer treated similarly to prisoners of war – they now had to wear prison uniforms and carry out prison work.
The withdrawal of this special status was part of a policy undertaken by the British government to criminalize such prisoners.
The protest against the withdrawal of the “Special Category Status” began with a blanket protest in 1976 in which prisoners refused to wear prison uniforms.
This was followed in 1978 by a dirty protest after a number of attacks on prisoners leaving their cells to "slop out" (i.e., empty their chamber pots).
The first hunger strike began in October 1980> Seven men were selected to take part.
On the apparent concession of the British Government to their Five Demands, the hunger strike ended after 53 days on December 18, 1980.
He was leader when the second hunger strike began on March 1, 1981.
Margaret Thatcher refuses to budge on "Special Category Status" despite.
After 66 days on hunger strike, Bobby Sands lost his life on May 5, 1981.
What are your memories of the time of the H-Block hunger strikes and Margaret Thatcher’s dealings with Northern Ireland?
Thirty-two years ago, a protest by Irish republican prisoners ended in one of the most courageous and tragic events in Irish history.
In 1976, the Brits decided that disagreeing with the government was a crime and political dissidents were criminals just as thieves, rapists and murderers.
By 1980, it was decided on another hunger strike.
In December, the Brits conceded and said they sent a proposal to Stormont; the strike ended after 53 days.
This one began on March 1, 1981 – the fifth anniversary of the withdrawal of political status.
Irish republican prisoners campaign for special status, 1976—1981
1976
1981
Northern Ireland
The Northern Ireland conflict, often called “the Troubles,” has a long and complex history.
Northern Ireland is an ‘island within an island,’ encompassing a Protestant majority in contrast to the larger island of Ireland, which has a Catholic majority.
Partition in 1921 and the declaration of the Irish Free State in 1922 designated Northern Ireland as under British jurisdiction and part of the United Kingdom.
Sinn Fein and the IRA emerged as the primary agents of republican opposition, engaging in a combination of violence and civil disobedience to protest British and Unionist dominance in Northern Ireland.
Loyalist paramilitary groups, primarily the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and the Ulster Defense Association (UDA), battled with the republican paramilitary groups in a cycle of violence that cost thousands of lives—many of them innocent civilians—and exacted a high emotional, psychological, and physical toll on the entire population of Northern Ireland.
(See also, in this database, “The Peace People” and the case of the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Movement, both of which campaigned by using nonviolent action.)
Long Kesh, the site of the 1981 hunger strike, was set up as a sort of internment camp during the thirty-year long conflict.
Beginning in 1972, prisoners accused of actions related to the Troubles were granted special category status, considered prisoners of war who did not have to wear prison uniforms or do prison work.
However, in 1976, British officials abolished special status for these prisoners, reverting to treating them as ordinary prisoners.
On September 16, 1976, Ciaran Nugent, an IRA member convicted to a three-year sentence at Long Kesh for high jacking a van, refused to put on prison clothes.
In place of clothing, they wrapped themselves in the prison blankets, thus beginning the “blanket protest.”
Then, in 1978, responding to ill treatment by prison officials, several prisoners refused to leave their cells to wash.
The dirty and blanket protests continued for the next several years.
In July 1978, The Catholic Primate of Ireland, Tomás Ó Fiaich, visited the Long Kesh prisoners, declaring in a public statement that the “blanket protesters” were living in inhumane and intolerable conditions.
Later, Ó Fiaich and the Bishop of Derry held a meeting with the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland in efforts to address the living condition of the prisoners.
They were also involved in trying to broker an agreement between British officials and the strikers in the 1981 hunger strike.
This was the case in 1981, when Bobby Sands entered Long Kesh on the charge of possession of firearms with fourteen years imprisonment.
Prior to Sands’ prison sentence, in 1980, seven republican prisoners along with several other prisoners in the Armagh Women’s Prison had commenced a hunger strike setting forth five demands.
On February 4, 1981, the republican prisoners issued a statement that their demands still hadn’t been met.
Then, on March 1, 1981, Sands began a hunger strike, taking up the five demands.
Initially, there seemed to be very little space for concessions to the prisoners; the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland issued a statement that prisoners’ demands would not be conceded to, and the Bishop of Derry criticized the decision of the hunger strikers.
Shortly after the beginning of the strike, on April 9, Bobby Sands was elected to British House of Commons as an Anti H Block candidate, the status accorded to prisoners who were up for election in Northern Ireland.
The announcement of Sands’ victory met with large public celebrations in several republican areas of Northern Ireland.
Sands’ election to the British House of Commons while in prison was a blow to the British rhetoric surrounding the Troubles.
In mid-April, Marcella Sands, the sister of Bobby Sands, appealed to the European Commission on Human Rights to look into the hunger strikers’ situation, claiming that the British government had broken three articles of the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR).
Francis Hughes, the second prisoner to join Sands on the hunger strike, became the second death on May 12, 1981.
Violence outside the prison had escalated considerably as well, further pressuring the British government to implement some sort of change.
The 1981 hunger strike, and the blanket and dirty protests leading up to it, had a far-reaching effect on the Troubles.
The situation of the prisoners revealed major issues in the British criminalization policies, and sparked calls for reform, as well as of the British presence in Northern Ireland more generally.
This site is dedicated to the ten brave men who sacrificed their lives in the H-Blocks of Long Kesh in Ireland, rather than allow the British government to class them as criminal, and to keeping their memories alive in Ireland and throughout world.
Read on to discover why the Irish Hungerstrikes of 1981 became an epic battle of wills between the Irish Republican prisoners, and the British Government.
The hunger strike of 1981 was one of, if not the most influential periods in the IRA’s long campaign to remove Britain from Irish politics.
Ten men, ten Irish Republican volunteers paid the ultimate sacrifice during those summer months of 1981.
A hunger strike and dirty protest demonstration on the Falls Road, Belfast in 1980.
While a huge amount of attention has been, and will be, given to commemorating and reflecting upon the centenary of the Easter Rising, 2016 also marks 35 years since the 1981 Long Kesh/Maze hunger strike.
During the 1981 strike, 10 republican prisoners in the Long Kesh/Maze prison starved themselves to death in an effort to increase pressure on British politicians to return their “special category” status.
This strike was preceded by another hunger strike in 1980, during which seven men started the fast for the same cause, with dozens joining them by the strike’s conclusion.
In December 1980, three women from Armagh Women’s Prison joined them in their fast.
All the strikes, but the 1981 Long Kesh/Maze strike in particular, generated an unprecedented amount of attention, at the time and subsequently, from the public, journalists, politicians, artists and academics alike.
In 1976, the British government removed special category status for prisoners convicted of Troubles-related offences.
Yet after March 1st, 1976, those convicted of paramilitary-related activities became ordinary prisoners, a policy referred to by paramilitary groups as “criminalisation”.
In September 1976, republican paramilitary prisoners, members of the Provisional IRA and Irish National Liberation Army (INLA), refused to wear this uniform and only wore the prison-issued blanket.
Thus, the blanket protest began.
In March 1978, the prison protests escalated to the “no wash”, or dirty protest, which saw prisoners refusing to wash or “slop out” their chamber pots.
In a final escalation of the prison protests, seven prisoners began a hunger strike on October 27th, 1980.
On December 18th, 1980 the hunger strikers ended their first protest when strike leader Brendan Hughes called off the strike as Sean McKenna grew close to death, believing the British government had conceded on several demands.
When the prisoners realised all five demands were not being met, they began to organise a second hunger strike.
A second hunger strike, led by Bobby Sands, began on March 1st, 1981 to mark the five-year anniversary of the removal of special category status.
The 1981 strike has inspired a huge range of artistic responses, from murals across Belfast and Derry, Peter Sheridan’s play Diary of a Hunger Strike (1982) and Steve McQueen’s film Hunger (2007).
Over the coming months, we shall publish articles from practitioners and academics working across the fields of political, religious, medical and art history and literary, theatre and cultural studies discussing how our perception of the strikes has changed, and how we, as a society, remember the events of 1980 and 1981.
Sanders made his plea in July 1981 while serving as mayor of Burlington, the town where he forged his political reputation, as recorded in his political archive held by the University of Vermont.
Papers also reveal the strong influence the Irish Republican movement had in the town during the 1980s, at the height of the Troubles.
The IRA hunger strikes were the culmination of a five-year protest by convicted paramilitary prisoners, which culminated in the death of 10 inmates.
City of BurlingtonBernie Sanders' letter to Margaret Thatcher concerning the 1981 IRA hunger strikes.
Sanders wrote two months after the death of hunger striker Bobby Sands: “We are deeply disturbed by your government’s unwillingness to stop the abuse, humiliation and degrading treatment of Irish prisoners now on hunger strikes in Northern Ireland.”
The letter was co-signed by Terry Bouricius, a Burlington alderman, and sent on July 15 1981.
Getty Images fileA British paratrooper takes a captured youth from the crowd on "Bloody Sunday," when British paratroopers opened fire on a civil rights march, killing 14 civilians, January 30, 1972 in Londonderry, Northern Ireland.
Britain’s involvement in Northern Ireland was hugely controversial in the US, where Irish descendents wielded considerable political influence.
Read the Introduction to ‘Hunger Strike’, a book of essays published by the Bobby Sands Trust on the 25th anniversary of the 1981 hunger strike.
Many years after the ending of the hunger strikes and blanket protest a prison officer said:
[pp 256-257, ‘Inside The Maze – The Untold Story of the Northern Ireland Prison Service’ by Chris Ryder.
The blanket protest lasted for five years; the no-wash/no slop-out or ‘dirty’ protest for three years; the first hunger strike for 53 days; and the second hunger strike, when ten prisoners died, an incredible seven months.
The only thing in the cell was a blanket which he draped over his shoulder and thus began the blanket protest.
In 1978 the prisoners began the no-wash/no slop-out protest which was to last until 1 March 1981, the day that Bobby Sands began his hunger strike.
The first major breakthrough in highlighting the conditions came after Archbishop Tomás Ó Fiaich’s visit in August 1978.
Ballagh’s 1980 image of, prophetically, a dead blanket man on a mortuary slab (on our cover) was first used on the cover of Tim Pat Coogan’s book, ‘On The Blanket’, which was itself an important contribution to raising public awareness about the protest.
Francis Hughes describes his slow death, how his blanket protest is like a transcendental ambush.
The protests which began in the H-Blocks and Armagh Women’s Prison in the autumn of 1976 were caused by the British government reneging on an agreement it had made in 1972 about the status of prisoners convicted in relation to the conflict.
When these arrests failed to stem the IRA campaign the British government in August 1971 introduced internment without trial, exclusively against the nationalist community, despite violence from loyalists.
Two republican prisoners were to die on hunger strike: Michael Gaughan in June 1974 and Frank Stagg (on his fourth hunger strike) in February 1976.
By granting political status in 1972 the British government settled the prisons in the North for a while.
In 1975/76 the British government launched a major three-pronged offensive.
The government announced that anyone arrested for a scheduled offence (a wide range of defined activities related to subversion) from 1 March 1976 would be considered a criminal and would be sent to the new regime in the H-Blocks or to Armagh women’s prison without political status.
But up until 1976 no prison officer had been killed as a result of working in the prisons.
But it was not until April 1976 – a month after the withdrawal of political status – that the first prison officer, Patrick Dillon, died at the hands of the IRA.
Writing a secret assessment of the IRA in 1978 Brigadier James Glover, the most senior army officer on the Defence Intelligence Staff, stated that the IRA was representative of the nationalist working class, “of which they [Volunteers] form a substantial part [and] do not fit the stereotype of criminality which the authorities have from time to time attempted to attach to them.”
A few months after the blanket protest began their families formed Relatives Action Committees (which Mary Nelis describes).
In 1980 the IRA publicly called a halt to its reprisals against prison officers to facilitate mediation attempts by the all-Ireland primate, Cardinal O Fiaich.
However, after several months of talks the British government refused to budge and thus began the 1980 hunger strike by seven prisoners.
Mary Doyle, herself a hunger striker in 1980, writes about the anger and frustration the prisoners felt.
And so, the prisoners announced a second hunger strike, led by Bobby Sands.
During the hunger strike there were many attempts at mediation, including one by the Irish Commission for Justice and Peace in July 1981.
The prisoners ended the hunger strike on 3 October 1981.
Twenty five years after their deaths on hunger strike the sacrifices of those ten prisoners, and that of their comrades, in the H-Blocks and in Armagh Jail, continue to have an impact in Ireland and further afield.
Until 1981 republicans were highly suspicious of electoral politics, with good reason given the history of splits on the issue, particularly on the subject of abstentionism.
For northern nationalists 1981 set in train a growing confidence which had been absent before that period.
Throughout 2006, young people – who were not even born in 1981 – flocked to various exhibitions, discussions, debates and lectures held across Ireland to commemorate what for many is the historic event of the North since the foundation of the state in 1921.
To mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the hunger strike the Bobby Sands Trust decided to invite a variety of writers, poets, journalists, musicians, activists, critics, filmmakers, playwrights, and broadcasters to reflect on 1981.
I look back at 1981 with extreme sadness but with astonishment at the epic nature of that prison struggle and at the courage of those men and women.
The British government, the RUC, the courts, the prison administration thought it could criminalise my generation of republican patriots by breaking the prisoners.
Exclusive: Documents in Vermont archive reveal presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders made a direct appeal to Margaret Thatcher in July 1981 on behalf of the IRA hunger strikers
Mr Sanders made his plea in July 1981 while serving as Mayor of Burlington, the Vermont town where he forged his political reputation.
These papers also reveal the strong influence the Irish Republican movement had in the town during the 1980s, a time when the “troubles” were at their height.
Bernie Sanders made a direct appeal to Margaret Thatcher in July 1981 on behalf of the IRA hunger strikers Bernie Sanders made a direct appeal to Margaret Thatcher in July 1981 on behalf of the IRA hunger strikers
The IRA hunger strikes were the culmination of a five-year protest by convicted paramilitary prisoners, which culminated in the death of 10 inmates.
“We are deeply disturbed by your government’s unwillingness to stop the abuse, humiliation and degrading treatment of Irish prisoners now on hunger strikes in Northern Ireland,” Mr Sanders wrote in a letter which was co-signed by Terry Bouricius, a Burlington alderman and sent on July 15 1981.
Britain’s involvement in Northern Ireland was hugely controversial in the United States, where those of Irish descent wielded considerable political influence.
The 1981 Irish Republican Hunger Strikes
From the 1st of May 1981 until the 3rd of October, a period of less than six months, ten men starved themselves to death for the Irish Republican cause.
[4] The hunger strikes irrevocably changed the landscape of Northern Ireland’s politics and the grounds of the conflict.
[6] Ultimately, the Republican’s goal was to reunite Ireland[7] and the first step towards this was to publicly discredit and dislodge Britain from Northern Ireland.
Throughout Northern Ireland’s history there was widespread discrimination against the Catholics by the Protestant minority.
[11] There was also explicit discrimination in employment which is commented on in the Cameron Report, Paragraph 138, in 1969 by the Northern Ireland Parliament stating:
This shows the deeply ingrained discrimination which permeated everyday life in Northern Ireland.
[16] The conflict became so violent and aggressive that by 1972 Britain decided to implement direct rule over Northern Ireland, sending in military forces.
Following Britain’s arrival in Northern Ireland, many Catholics were initially pleased and grateful for the perceived stability their presence would bring to the country (Elliott & Flackes 1999, p. 609).
After Britain controlled Northern Ireland rather than letting the Irish resolve their own internal disputes, there was a strong feeling from Northern Irish and Republican Catholic’s that the British were not to be trusted.
In 1976 she stated:
And in the Washington Post on the 6th of May 1981 stated:
[34] Britain’s immovable position on the issue provoked the Republican prisoners to take more extreme measures to defeat Britain and remove their influence from Northern Ireland[35] , motivating them to hunger strike.
Arguably the most important event motivating the prisoners to hunger strike was the removal of ‘special category status’ in 1976.
[38] This is articulated by Pauline, the wife of a prisoner in the H-Block who in 1980 commented:
Bobby Sands wrote a diary during the first 17 days of his hunger strike and on Tuesday the 10th of March 1981 he stated:
[46] Beginning in 1976, the Blanket protest involved the prisoners refusing to wear the prison uniform and wearing their only other material possession, their blankets.
[49] On the 27th of October 1980, a hunger strike was instigated, advocating five demands.
[55] Engaging in the political establishment of Northern Ireland was not an option as Northern Irish Catholics had previously boycotted the system due to the overrepresentation of Protestants.
[60] An example of this is another excerpt from Bobby Sands’ Diary on Sunday the 1st of March 1981, which stated:
The prisoners of the H-Block in Northern Ireland had many connected and deeply rooted reasons for hunger striking in 1981.
[72] Following the removal of ‘special category status’ in 1976 by Britain, Republican prisoners began an extensive and drawn out series of protests seeking public acknowledgement of their political motives with the five demands.
The self-devised focus question it responds to is 'What were the motives of the Irish Republican hunger strikers of 1981?'
The Troubles was a period of ethno-political conflict in Northern Ireland which spilled over at various times into England, the Republic of Ireland, and Continental Europe.
The duration of the Troubles is conventionally dated from the late 1960s and considered by many to have ended with the Belfast Agreement of 1998 (answers.com).
The principal issues at stake in the Troubles were the Constitutional status of Northern Ireland and the relationship between the mainly-Protestant Unionist and mainly-Catholic Nationalist communities in Northern Ireland (answers.com).
The Hunger Strike of 1981 was one of, if not the most influential periods in the IRA's long campaign to remove Britains' role from irish politics (irishhungerstrike.com).
It radicalised nationalist politics, and was the midwife to Sinn Féin as a serious political force, which ultimately led to it overtaking the SDLP as the main nationalist party in Northern Ireland (experiencefestival.com).
"Ten men, ten Irish Republican volunteers paid the ultimate sacrifice during those summer months of 1981 to the cause of the Irish finally being able to be truly free: Bobby Sands, Francis Hughes, Raymond McCreesh, Patsy O'Hara, Joe McDonnell, Martin Hurson, Kevin Lynch, Tom McElwee, Kieran Doherty and Mickey Devine" (irishhungerstrike.com).
The strike started in 1981.
There were many effects of the 1980 and and 1981 Hunger Strikes.
This policy meant that from the first of March in 1976, any sentenced [IRA prisoner] would no longer be allowed the usual rights of a [political] prisoner in Ireland (larkscript.com).
The end of the hunger strike came on October 3, 1981 (The Hunger Strike of 1981).
At this point, there were six Republican prisoners still on strike and refusing to eat their food (The Hunger Strike of 1981).
The reason the hunger strike ended was because the prisoners realized that when they would laps into unconsciousness, their families would ask for medical intervention (The Hunger Strike of 1981).
On October 6, 1981, James Prior, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, announced a series of measures which met the aspects of the prisoners' five demands (The Hunger Strike of 1981).
As one of the prominent leaders of the PD she was included in the main marches organized by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NIRC
In this contest her role was to publize the cause of republican prisoners in jails in Northern Ireland who had begun a series of protests in order to secure changes to the prison regime (irishhungerstrike.com).
She became head spokesperson for the Smash H-Block Campaign and supported the Irish Hunger Strike in 1980 and 1981 (wikipedia.com).
Mairead Farrell was born in Belfast, Northern Ireland on August 3, 1957 (relativesforjustice.com).
In 1976, she too was arrested and convicted of her role in the infamous Conway Hotel bombings.
In 1976, Mairead was arrested after taking part in the IRA's campaign.
In March 1981, Bobby Sands began his humger strike and they women showed their full support.
Between May 6 and August 20, 1981, 10 POWs including Bobby Sands died because of their commitment to the strike (irelandsown.net).
He also lead the 1981 hunger strike as well as a member of the United Kingdom Parliament as an Anti H-Block/Armagh Political Prisoner candidate.
On March 1, 1981, Bobby Sands refused to eat his food in the H-Block (Beyond the Troubles?)
On Friday the British government released papers under the 30-year rule that deal with the conflict in Ireland and in particular, the 1981 hunger strikes.
Over 50 other people were killed during the summer of 1981, including children killed by plastic bullets.
However, it is very clear from an initial examination of the papers that the policy pursued by Thatcher in 1981 was inflexible, intransigent and at crucial points duplicitous.
The prisoners had agreed procedures among themselves to ensure there would be no repeat of the events of the previous December when the first hunger strike ended.
The prisoners wanted Brendan McFarlane, officer commanding in the H Blocks, and someone from outside to be part of any discussions about any British government proposals.
Margaret Thatcher privately expressed regret over the 1981 Irish hunger strike, newly released letters to the families of prisoners show.
The files also reveal Thatcher’s fear that she would be targeted again by the IRA after narrowly avoiding assassination in the Brighton bombing of October 12, 1984, and how the attack nearly derailed secret Northern Ireland peace negotiations.
In her response, Mrs Thatcher said: “I do care very deeply about those to whom the hunger strike has brought pain and bereavement, as I do for all those in Northern Ireland who have suffered from violence in whatever form that has taken.
The hunger strike ended on October 3, 1981, when James Prior, the Northern Ireland secretary, announced prisoners could wear their own clothes and remission lost would be restored.
Near the Beechmount area, in Belfast’s Falls Road, there is a mural of the ten prisoners who died in the 2nd great hunger strike of 1981.
Campaign by Irish Republican Army (IRA) members in Belfast, Northern Ireland, who wanted political or "special category" status as prisoners.
The campaign's climax came on May  5, 1981, when Bobby Sands, an IRA prisoner at the Maze/Long Kesh prison, died after a hunger strike that lasted sixty-six days.
The campaign started in 1976 when IRA prisoners refused to wear prison clothing, the badge of an ordinary criminal, and covered themselves with the only clothing at hand-their blankets.
The "blanket protest" became the "dirty protest" when the prisoners smeared their excrement on the walls, floors, and ceilings of their cells.
And when that didn't work, seven prisoners embarked on a hunger strike in October 1980 for the right to wear their own clothes, to associate freely, and not to have to do prison · work.
Mrs. Thatcher won the battle of wills - the hunger strikers abandoned their fast on October 3, 1981, 217 days after the protest started - but little else.
The British government lost the propaganda war, resuscitated an ailing IRA, and politicized militant Republicanism.
The hunger strikes were the catalyst for change in the 1980s and even into the 1990s.
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, secured a third of the nationalist vote in the October 1982 election for the Northern Ireland Assembly.
The agreement gave the Irish government a consultative role in the affairs of Northern Ireland and put Anglo-Irish relations on a new footing.
" The talks, which intermittently took place in 1991 and 1992 among these parties and the constitutional parties in Northern Ireland and the British and Irish governments, were aimed at finding mutually acceptable governance structures for Northern Ireland and a North-South relationship that satisfied the aspirations of both communities, resulting in an agreement that would supersede the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
After the hunger strikes, the party pursued a dual strategy: a campaign of violence in Northern Ireland coupled with participation in the electoral processes in both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
