Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem

Ngo Dinh Diem was the first president of South Vietnam.
Frederick Nolting, U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam from 1961 to 1963, drew the conclusion that the inability of the U.S. administration to accept Diem's style of government resulted in the coup of I November 1963.
The generals said they would have a safe passage out of the country; but, on their way to get out of the country on 2 November 1963, the two were killed by troops who had their own agenda.
The consequences of the 1 November coup d'état will be contrary to the calculations of the U.S. imperialists...Diem was one of the strongest individuals resisting the people and Communism.
Diem was one of the most competent lackeys of the U.S. imperialists…The coup d'état on 1 November 1963 will not be the last.
The fall of the Diem regime on 1 November 1963 presented the NFLSVN with both an opportunity and a crisis.
On 2 November 1963, President Diem was overthrown and later murdered.
A total of 140,000 leaflets were dropped by the 23rd Division during the first week of November 1963.
After living for years under the cruel, dictatorial and feudal rule of the Ngo family, the people of South Vietnam and the Army of the Republic of Vietnam rose up on 1 November 1963 and overthrew the rotten regime…Now that the treacherous regime has been overthrown by the mighty revolutionary movement sweeping free Vietnam, The Revolutionary Army makes to you all this cordial appeal and invites you to return to the side of the people and the Army so that we can work together to build a happy, free, and democratic regime for Vietnam….
It is dated 7 November 1963.
A similar un-coded leaflet is a letter from The Provisional Administration of Long An to the “Military Cadres in South Vietnam Liberation Front” Dated 7 November 1963.
Leaflet SP-48 is a letter leaflet entitled: “Compatriots of Binh Duong, Increase your Vigilance, Unite to Annihilate Communism,” dated 13 November 1963 from the Province Chief of Binh Duong.
On 1 November 1963, the Revolutionary gunfire of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam exploded to overthrow the despotic, cruel and corrupt Ngo Dinh Diem regime…The Army has successfully eliminated Nhu-Diem and their lackeys in order to liberate you from their oppressing yoke….
Diem, a Catholic who had been oppressing the Buddhist majority, remained stubborn despite continued Buddhist protests and repeated U.S. requests to liberalize his government’s policies.
In November 1963, South Vietnamese military officers assassinated Diem and his brother during a coup.
Ngô Đình Diệm was the first president of South Vietnam (1955–1963).
Amid religious protests that garnered worldwide attention, Diệm lost the backing of his U.S. patrons and was assassinated, along with his brother, Ngô Đình Nhu by Nguyễn Văn Nhung, the aide of ARVN General Dương Văn Minh on 2 November 1963, during a coup d'état that deposed his government.
Madame Nhu (April 15, 1924 – April 24, 2011), also known as Madame Ngô Đình Nhu and born Trần Lệ Xuân, was considered the First Lady of South Vietnam from 1955 to 1963.
In 1943, she married Ngô Đình Nhu, and converted from Mahayana Buddhism to Roman Catholicism, her husband's religion.
On November 1, 1963 her brother-in-law and her husband were assassinated in a coup d'état led by General Dương Văn Minh with the understanding that the United States would not intervene.
The military government of Vietnam under General Dương Văn Minh confiscated all of her family's property in Saigon and she was not allowed to return to South Vietnam.
In response to Diệm and Nhu, assassination in a coup d’état led by General Dương Văn Minh (Armed Forces Council)
Addressing the claim that President Ngo Dinh Diem and her husband Ngo Dinh Nhu committed suicide (3 November 1963)
It should be clear by now the three fatal flaws in Ngo Dinh Diem’s policies: the first being religious discrimination, followed by nepotism, and the final is failure to control the staggering American influence in Saigon (although the third factor is more or less out of his hands).
Go Forward to the next Section of Volume 2, Chapter 4 of the Pentagon Papers, "The Overthrow of Ngo Dinh Diem, May-November 1963"
In the midst of this crisis, a newly appointed American ambassador, Henry Cabot Lodge, arrived in Saigon and within days approved a plan for a CIA-backed coup to overthrow Diem.
The successful coup d'état against Ngo Dinh Diem, president of the Republic of Vietnam (RVN), or South Vietnam, in November of 1963 created a power vacuum in the region.
Phan Khac Suu, a Vietnamese engineer, served as the president of South Vietnam, while Dr. Phan Huy Quat, a medical specialist, was the prime minister.
Soon after the country was divided, Ngo Dinh Diem had proclaimed himself president of South Vietnam by means of a fraudulent election.
The Diem regime did not heed the Buddhist's warning, believing that the NLF was the true source of opposition and ignoring claims of religious discrimination.
