British Empire

By the turn of the 20th century the British Empire covered 13,012,000 square miles, a quarter of Earth’s landmass, and governed 458 million people, a full fifth of the world’s population.
During England’s Civil War the colonies were left to stagnate for a decade, and when Cromwell’s Parliamentarians emerged victorious a fierce naval campaign was waged against the Dutch, who had usurped the majority of trade with England’s own colonies.
Most colonies were Royalist sympathisers, except for the religious dissidents of New England, so Cromwell’s formidably trained Army and Navy were sent to the Caribbean to install pro-Commonwealth leaders, it was at this time that Jamaica was won from the Spanish, although the English forces had a harder time facing tropical diseases than their enemies.
The agricultural and industrial revolutions had led to increased urbanisation and a diminished need for farm labourers, many people therefore emigrated to the British colonies in North America, and following them were those transported as indentured servants or criminals.
The British American colonies were grew much faster than their French counterparts and were progressively expanding westwards across the continent, killing and displacing natives as they did so.
King George III issued a promise to Native American tribes that there would be no encroachment further westwards than the Appalachian mountain range; he had also raised taxes in order to repay loans taken out to fund the Seven Years War in Europe, and he expected the colonies to contribute equally for their own defence.
France invested heavily in the revolutionaries yet saw little return as the ex-colonies would become their own independent United States of America, while France would face its own revolution less than a decade later.
The discovery in the new Boer Republic of gold and diamonds led to a scramble for African colonies; at the Berlin Conference in 1884 the European powers divided the continent between them, with Britain taking much of the East and the South, chosen for their pleasant climates and fertile land.
Iraq, Transjordan, and Palestine transferred from Ottoman to British rule, as did the German colonies of Togoland, Cameroon, and German East Africa; indeed West Samoa was ceded to New Zealand, and the Solomon Islands to Australia, so that now even the colonies had colonies.
The 1931 Statute of Westminster redefined the dominions as “autonomous communities within the British Empire, equal in status and in no way subordinate to one another in any aspect of their domestic or external affairs”.
Britain could only legislate on their behalf if so requested, and the dominions were free to leave the Commonwealth if they wished.
The clash of empires continued, and as the Second World War commenced Britain again called upon its old colonies.
Britain began to peacefully disengage from her colonies once stable, non-communist governments were in place.
The political relationship within the Commonwealth was also rapidly changing, whereas it had originally been comprised of the old white dominions, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, by 1965 there were 21 members; and now that there are currently 53.
The Caribbean colonies together formed the West Indies Federation in 1958, but this collapsed after the departure of the two biggest members, Trinidad and Jamaica.
A post-colonial outlook overtook the previously deferential attitude towards the British, a nations fleet of aircraft became more important that its fleet of ships, and free-trade replaced the protectionist trade-network between the dominions and the mother-country.
Besides the African ex-colonies which favoured the Presidential system of government, the English Parliamentary system has been almost universally adopted around the globe, and English Common Law has likewise provided the basis for many legal systems.
Millions more moved between colonies, in particular the migration of Indians and Chinese to the Pacific and Caribbean islands.
The demographic of Britain was likewise altered immensely through the post-war period with continual immigration into Britain from her former colonies.
First, there were the colonies of white settlement.
Although these had shrunk in significance with the loss of the American colonies in the War of Independence (1776-82), by the 1800s they were beginning to expand once more and to attract English-speaking emigrants.
Of a very different kind was the enormous and complex eastern empire which had been created in India since the beginning of the Seven Years' War in 1756, and which was to become in the 19th century the centrepiece of Britain's overseas possessions.
Finally there were the historic sugar colonies of the Caribbean, such as Jamaica and Barbados, acquired in the mid-seventeenth century.
In West Africa British possessions were limited to the settlement of Sierra Leone (a humanitarian venture begun in 1787, which was designed to serve the interests both of poor blacks from Britain and North America as well as freed slaves), and some scattered trading posts on the Gambia and Gold Coast.
The growth of Britain's empire in Africa, India and elsewhere in the eastern hemisphere by 1815 has often been seen as the result of a systematic search for a new empire to replace the wealth of the lost American colonies.
Initially the company was formed just to trade but it soon realised that competition from the Dutch and French meant it needed to secure and protect trading posts on the Indian subcontinent.
A reason why France, for instance, didnt see colonial empires as must-have during the ancient-régime: France was rich enough to sustain a big army without colonies.
Our kings saw the colonies only are a bonus, and Napoléon didnt believe in them at all.
against 13,000,000 square miles 33,670,000 km² (13,000,000 sq. miles) for the British Empire... modest yes!
Don't forget the largest empire in history, the British Empire, was built on immigration.
The origins of the empire date from the late 16th cent.
Usually they began by setting up fortified trading posts, but where no strong indigenous government existed the English gradually extended their powers over the surrounding area.
These colonies, together with those established by Roman Catholics and Protestant dissenters in NE North America, attracted a considerable and diversified influx of European settlers.
Organized by chartered companies, the colonies soon developed representative institutions, evolving from the company governing body and modeled on English lines.
In the 1680s the revision of certain colonial charters to bring the North American and West Indian colonies under the supervision of royal governors resulted in chronic friction between the governors and elected colonial assemblies.
The Treaty of Paris (1763; see under Paris, Treaty of) firmly established the British in India and Canada, but the financial burdens of war involved the government in difficulties with the American colonies.
With territories scattered across every continent and ocean and in every time-zone, the "Empire Under Palm and Pine" was accurately described as "the empire on which the sun never sets."
There were colonies conquered, but they were done for a reason.
The only serious loss of territory was the loss of the 13 American colonies in the American Revolution of 1776 – 1783, which became the United States of America.
Most colonies are now independent; today’s Commonwealth is composed of former and remaining territories of the British Empire and a few non former British Empire countries which once belonged to other powers such as Portugal, France and Belgium.
The merchant fleet of Britain herself was the largest and most efficient in the world, while that belonging to the great colonies was far from small.
These ships were the most important material bond uniting the far-flung dominions of the King-Emperor.
By the 1930’s, in every case, except in the naval and military colonies, the tendency was to give the natives an ever-increasing share of power as they showed increasing ability for self-government.
Crown Colony status came to an end in 1998 when the few remaining colonies were restyled as British Overseas Territories (e.g. Bermuda, the Falkland Islands, Gibraltar).
Further, under the League of Nations, mandates were given to the British Dominions also.
The British Empire was the greatest empire the world has ever seen, and for more than a century Britain was the foremost global power.
It began in the 15th and 16th centuries when global exploration sanctioned by the English and Scotish people began to establish overseas colonies.
There are many reasons why these colonies were established, but one of the principal reasons was trade and financial benefit.
Initially many colonies were established in North America and the Caribbean, but spread to Africa and Asia.
The growth of the empire was not without opposition, notably from France and the Netherlands, and a big loss was sustained in 1783 when thirteen American colonies broke away from British rule.
As well as having formal control over its own colonies, with a dominant position in world trade Britain could effectively control the economies of many countries including China, Argentina and Siam.
On the other hand, it could be argued that by taking goods and resources from the colonies, Britain exploited and profiteered unfairly.
They may be colonies, protectorate or occupied.
The empire began in the 17th century and lasted until the middle of the 20th century It was made of all kinds of places, from dominions, colonies, protectorates and mandates all ruled or governed by the United Kingdom.
The British Empire began with the overseas possessions and trading posts claimed by England (before it became Britain) between the late 16th and early 18th centuries.
By the 1920s there were 458 million people in the British Empire, a fifth of the world's population at the time, and it covered a quarter of the Earth's land surface.
It was so big that it was called 'the empire on which the sun never sets' because the sun was always shining over at least one of its territories because they spread over so many parts of the world.
Once thy had colonies, each of these countries was able to set up trade networks.
Towards the end of the 18th century, the 13 American (but not Canadian) colonies left the empire, and it lost some of its most valuable resources.
So the British government began to give more powers to those British settlers who lived in the colonies.
Later, these old colonies became completely self-governing and were called dominions.
After the Second World War, Britain was in no position to control its colonies.
There was a new wave of people wanting to govern themselves, and there was no possibility of the colonies being forced to remain in the empire.
This #CommonwealthDay remember the oppressive laws and regulations the British Empire imposed on the Indigenous ppl of their colonies.
They are different from colonies as they have local rulers and people ruling over the territory and experience rare cases of immigration of settlers from the country it has suzerainty of.
However, a state which remains under the protection of another state but still retains independence is known as a protected state and is different from protectorates.
In fact, protectorates were declared despite not being duly entered into by the traditional states supposedly being protected, or only by a party of dubious authority in those states.
Colonial protectors frequently decided to reshuffle several protectorates into a new, artificial unit without consulting the protectorates, a logic disrespectful of the theoretical duty of a protector to help maintain its protectorates' status and integrity.
The Berlin agreement of February 26, 1885 allowed the colonial powers to establish protectorates in Black Africa (the last region to be divided among them) by diplomatic notification, even without actual possession on the ground.
A protectorate formally enters into the protection through a bilateral agreement with the protector, while international mandates are stewarded by the world community-representing body, with or without a de facto administering power.
British protectorates[edit]
Some British colonies were ruled directly by the Colonial Office in London, while others were ruled indirectly through local rulers who are supervised behind the scenes by British advisors.
These nations or tribes would be considered protectorates by treaty.
Other British protectorates followed.
Most British protectorates were overseen by a Commissioner or a High Commissioner, rather than a Governor.
Persons connected with former British protectorates, protected states, mandated or trust territories may remain British Protected Persons if they did not acquire the nationality of the country at independence.
Asterisks denote protectorates which were governed from a colony of the same name.
French protectorates[edit]
Most French protectorates were colonial:
The German Empire used the word "Schutzgebiet", literally protectorate, for all of its colonies until they were lost during World War I, regardless of the actual level of government control.
Joint protectorates[edit]
But Britain barely considered constitutional intregration of colonies into Great Britain.
Its initial instinct, to hold colonies in thrall, led to the American Revolution and the alienation of its first and most promising colonies.
In those terms, India, the Dominions, and then the substantial African colonies were anomalous -- except that in some ways, the Greeks had done that also.
In America, Australia, New Zealand, and elsewhere, British emigrants settled and founded states, just as Greek cities founded new cities as colonies in the Mediterranean.
Greek colonies, as it happened, immediately become autonomous; but then, with the lag of a few years, so did the British Dominions.
Another lesson to be read off the trade figures is that a relatively small fraction of British trade involved colonies that would later constitute the "Third World."
Indeed, the only trade surpluses in the table are with India, Africa, the West Indies, and the Far East, which might give some heart to Marxist claims that British colonies, especially India, were the outlet for Capitalist "excess production."
However, the trade surpluses are small, and overall British trade with India and the other colonies is hardly larger than with the much, much smaller populations of Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
Lenin saw British colonies as the necessary outlet for British capital, as well as for British capitalist "overproduction."
In former British colonies, this is also understandable.
The British were indeed properly educated to be Roman Proconsuls, and this was something often needed in the colonies; but it contributed nothing to the industrial or commercial strength of Britain, and its very prestige sapped, undermined, and degraded the material sources of British power.
Against the Marxist-Leninist view that the exploitation of colonies was part of the larger capitalist exploitation of labor, there is the sobering truth, evident by the eighties, that many former British colonies, especially the African colonies, had been better off economically under the British than they were later.
