1962 South Vietnamese Independence Palace bombing

Formerly, this place was known as the Independence Palace.
The new establishment would later be known as Norodom Palace - French colonial headquarters in Saigon - in 1873 when construction was complete.
The bomb was said to have dropped in the same room as he was during that moment but it had failed to detonate.
Diệm’s proposed infrasture was known as the Independence Palace.
Amid Thiệu’s reign, the Independence Palace was South Vietnam’s government headquarters during the Vietnam War.
North Vietnamese army crashed through the iron gates of the Independence Palace.
On the early morning of Feb. 27, 1962, two VNAF Skyraiders took off from Bien Hoa Air Base for a close air support mission in the 4th Tactical Corps, but instead of flying straight to the target area, both aircraft made a sharp right turn to the Saigon vicinity and bombed the Presidential Independence Palace.
In an attempt to assassinate President Ngo Dinh Diem, the two young pilots, First Lt. Pham Phu Quoc and Second Lt. Nguyen Van Cu, destroyed the left wing of the Presidential Palace by dropping their 500 lb.
Lt. Nguyen Van Cu flew to Cambodia for political asylum and Lt. Pham Phu Quoc survived a crash-landing in the Saigon River.
Lt. Pham Phu Quoc was then reintegrated into the Vietnamese Air Force (VNAF) and later rose to the rank of Lt. Colonel.
And in the memories of most Vietnamese Southerners who lived during the political turmoil of that time, Pham Phu Quoc has been always mourned and admired for his patriotism.
During the Vietnam War, at a time when the Republic of South Vietnam seemed to be a "Banana Republic" with many coup d'etats and political instabilities, Pham Phu Quoc, Nguyen Van Cu and the many uncounted junior military officers of the ARVN were her magnificent silver lining.
Ngo Dinh Diem            At 7 a.m., in the second-floor study of Saigon's yellow stucco Freedom Palace, South Viet Nam's President Ngo Dinh Diem was absorbed in a biography of George Washington, the gift of a recent U.S. visitor.
Archbishop Thuc, in Saigon for medical treatment.
Minesweepers patrolled the Saigon River.
Then two loyal pilots from the Bienhoa air base, twelve miles north of Saigon, gave chase, but on the ground in Saigon no one knew if the new arrivals were friends or foes.
Finally, a shot from a minesweeper downed one of the rebel planes, and as the pilot crash-landed in the Saigon River, the other plane fled toward the Cambodian border about 40 miles away.
His identity proved surprising: Lieut. Pham Phu Quoc, a French-trained flying ace in the South Vietnamese air force who recently was congratulated by President Diem for flying hundreds of sorties against the Communist Viet Cong.
In fact, he and the second aerial rebel were due to fly an anti-Red mission that morning, headed for the Saigon palace instead.
On the early morning of February 27, 1962, this Skyraider piloted by 1st Lt. Pham Phu Quoc and another (BuNo.135284) piloted by 2nd Lt. Nguyen Van Cu took off from Bien Hoa Air Base for a close air support mission in the 4th Tactical Corps, but instead of flying straight to the target area, they attacked South Vietnamese Independence Palace at Saigon and tried to kill President Diem during coup-attempt.
This A-1H was shot down by Viet Nam naval anti-aircraft fire and fell down to Saigon river.
Pilot Pham Phu Quoc survived, but imprisoned until 1963.
The aircraft was soon recovered from Saigon river.
A-1H retrieved from Saigon river after it was shot down in a failed attack of presidential South Vietnamese Independence Palace on 27th February 1962.
A-1H retrieved from Saigon river after it was shot down in a failed attack of presidential South Vietnamese Independence Palace on 27th February 1962.
Two A-1H (BuNo.134495 and BuNo.135284) over Saigon river during South Vietnamese Independence Palace bombing on February 27th, 1962.
Two A-1H (BuNo.134495 and BuNo.135284) over Saigon river during South Vietnamese Independence Palace bombing on February 27th, 1962.
Two A-1H (BuNo.134495 and BuNo.135284) over Saigon river during South Vietnamese Independence Palace bombing on February 27th, 1962.
One of two A-1H (BuNo.134495 or BuNo.135284) attacked South Vietnamese Independence Palace on February 27th, 1962.
When the French departed, the palace became home to the unpopular South Vietnamese President Ngô Đình Diệm.
On February 27, 1962, 2 pilots (Nguyễn Văn Cử and Phạm Phú Quốc) on two A-1 Skyraider (A-1D/AD-6 variant) aircraft of Diem’s own air force bombed the palace, almost destroying the entire left wing, in an unsuccessful attempt to kill him.
The newly completed building was inaugurated on October 31,1966 by General and later president Nguyễn Văn Thiệu, the chairman of the National Leadership Committee and head of the military junta, and was named Independence Palace (Dinh Doc Lap).
On April 21, 1975, prior to the Fall of Saigon, Thieu hastily fled the palace and went into exile.
After a day of bombardment, the North Vietnamese were ready to make their final push into Saigon.
At 3:30 PM, Minh broadcast over the radio, stating “I declare the Saigon government…completely dissolved at all levels.”
Following the liberation of Saigon, the Palace became the headquarters of the Municipal Military Administrative Committee.
Also on display are a Mercedes Benz 200 W110 car and a XE Jeep M151A2, a gallery with historical pictures on the walls (including many photos of US soldiers and personnel making a mad dash for the departing helicopters during the Fall of Saigon) and the best map of Vietnam you’ll ever see pasted on the wall, all supposedly left exactly as it was found when the North took over.
The "Reunification Palace" in HCMC was formerly known as the "Independence Palace."
The Independence Palace stands on the site of the old "Norodom Palace" which the French colonials built in 1873 as the official residence of the governor-general of French Indochina.
Instead of restoring it, he had the old colonial landmark torn down and ordered the Independence Palace to be built in its stead in 1962.
old Palace was leveled in 1962 to give way to the Independence Palace which was completed in 1966.
The Independence Palace has a modern post-colonial look which sets it apart from the Francophone architecture of the old Norodom Palace and other colonial-era buildings still standing in Vietnam.
The Independence Palace also survived a bombing raid by an undercover Viet Cong pilot serving in the South Vietnamese air force.
The lacquer painting hanging on the wall is National Landscape painted in 1966 by Ngo Viet Thu, architect of the Independence Palace.
Above: Details of four paintings in the Independence Palace collection, clockwise from top left: 1) The Vietnam Quoc Tu painting at the Ceremonial Hall; 2) A painting inspired by the Vietnamese epic poem Truyen Kieu ("Tales of Kieu") by Nguyen Du; 3) National Landscape by Ngo Viet Thu; and 4) Ngoc Han Princess by Van Ba.
A penthouse view of the NVA (PAVN) tanks (replicas) Nos. 390 and 843 that crashed the wrought iron gates of the Independence Palace on April 30, 1975 leading to its capture which ended the war and reunified the country.
Right, top: The Viet Cong-NLF flag which was raised up the Independence Palace flagpole on April 30, 1975.
(Heretofore, command and control over the prosecution of the war was in American hands at the MACV Saigon headquarters.)
By then, all arrows in the map room must have been pointing towards Saigon.
Neither willing to sustain nor inflict unnecessary casualties in a fratricidal conflict, the combined Viet Cong and NVA forces bided their time until Saigon and the Presidential Palace were ripe for the picking.
The Independence Palace was commissioned and built in a time of war.
It is rather apt that the Independence Palace has been renamed the "Reunification Palace."
Built and occupied by self-proclaimed presidents (who had no legitimate mandate to govern, deriving their power to rule largely from the support of foreign sponsors) the Independence Palace then was neither "independent" nor "presidential."
More to the point, it endures as a cultural icon of the Vietnamese nation, like the country's centuries-old temples and pagodas in Hanoi, Hue, and Saigon.
Independence Palace, also known as Reunification Palace, built on the site of the former Norodom Palace, is a landmark in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
It was the site of the end of the Vietnam War during the Fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, when a North Vietnamese Army tank crashed through its gates.
On 27 February 1962, two pilots of Diệm's Vietnam Air Force, Nguyễn Văn Cử and Phạm Phú Quốc, rebelled and flew two A-1 Skyraider (A-1D/AD-6 variant) aircraft towards the palace and bombed it, instead of going on a raid against the Việt Cộng.
The construction of the new Independence Palace started on 1 July 1962.
Step inside an eerie Saigon palace with a terrifying past.
That was the month when American-backed South Vietnam fell to the North and the victors draped their flag over the Saigon icon’s balcony.
Built on the site of a French-colonial mansion, the building – originally called Independence Palace – was completed in 1966.
A bomb that pierced a room in the western wing where he was reading failed to explode, prompting him to claim in a burst of irrational exuberance that he had “divine protection”.
Departing from Biên Hòa Air Base on Saigon’s outskirts, Trung flew a hornet-like F-5E aircraft at the palace, determined to destroy the symbol of Catholic domination.
Reunification Palace is in District 1, central Saigon.
Handout 2653 - Independence Palace
This July 1968 Joint United States Public Affairs Office handout depicts an 8 x 10-inch photograph of the Independence Palace.
On 27 February 1962, two anti-Diem government pilots flying Douglas A-1 Skyraiders bombed the building in a futile attempt at assassinating the president.
The palace was the site of the official handover of power during the fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975 after a North Vietnamese tank knocked down the main gate.
Increasing attacks from the North overwhelmed the remaining government outposts in the Central Highlands, and the Saigon government surrendered on 30 April 1975.
Increasing attacks from the North overwhelmed the remaining government outposts in the Central Highlands, and the Saigon government surrendered on 30 April 1975.
Following line, not to be volunteered, should be used in Saigon (and will be followed in Washington) in answering any press queries on a background basis: "We have for sometime been dropping leaflets in South Vietnamese border areas, Given wind drift, we assume some of these leaflets have been falling inside Cambodia."
MACV Headquarters – Saigon
Navy E4 David White worked in Saigon in the J3 (Operations Section) of MACV in 1970.
I was stationed at MACV in Saigon from April 1970 through May 1971 and lived in the Dodge City barracks.
Monta L. Osborne was the Chief of Field Development Division in the Joint United States Public Affairs Office (JUSPAO) in Saigon.
30,000 copies of this newspaper were prepared and handed out by the Vietnamese Information Service (VIS) Cadre to urban citizens that lived around the capitol of Saigon.
JUSPAO had a printing plant in Saigon.
He states that when he arrived he was the only officer in the Saigon mission that had actual experience with Communist affairs.
On 1 March 1963 a decision was made to form 3 PSYWAR Battalions and the original unit became the 1st PSYWAR Battalion headquartered in Saigon.
The 20th Battalion is in II Corps at Pleiku, the 30th Battalion in in III Corps at Bien Hoa, the 40th Battalion in in IV Corps at Can Tho and the 50th Battalion is in Saigon.
The stations were located in Saigon, Hue, Quang Nhai, Qui Nhon, Banmethuot, Nha Trang, Dalat, Ba Xuyen, Hoi An, Tuy Hoa and Tan An.
Other black Allied radio stations included the SOG fake Radio Hanoi clone broadcast from Number 7 Hong Tap Street in Saigon; Radio Red Flag, the voice of an alleged breakaway North Vietnamese Communist Party faction; and the CIA station Red Star Radio, allegedly a dissident Communist group in South Vietnam.
Just before the Viet Cong launched the May 1968 second phase of their Tet Offensive, Tam Ha came over to the Government side bearing the complete tactical plan for the second VC attempt to “liberate” Saigon.
He came to Saigon because "Nixon went to China," so Jim had to close down his long-running Chinese broadcasts from Taiwan.
In Saigon only General Westmoreland and four non-SOG officers were even briefed on SOG.
Two Blue Eagle aircraft were based at Tan Son Nhut Air Base in Saigon to broadcast Channel 11 of Armed Forces Vietnam Television (the American Forces Vietnam Network), and Channel 9 of THVN (the official station of the Government of Vietnam) in South Vietnam until 1970.
Ranging from the north to the south, I Corps was in the north abutting North Vietnam, in the foothills and coastal regions east of the Annamite Mountains; II Corps was in the country's least populated region, encompassing the rugged central highlands and central plateau; III Corps was on the densely populated alluvial plain surrounding Saigon; IV Corps was the heavily populated and agriculturally productive Mekong Delta.
In late 1965, a small unit of the Okinawa-based 7th PSYOP Group arrived in Saigon.
During 1965 The Okinawa printing plant produced 125 million leaflets for MACV and the Vietnam Detachment produced another 62 million on its web-fed press in Saigon.
Later they moved to 16 Pham Ngu Lao in the Cholon section of Saigon (The Cruz Compound in the Saigon rail yards).
Generally, the detachment developed and produced much of its own material, however, major leaflet drops (most along the Cambodian border) of thousands of pounds of leaflets by C-47 required leaflets to be produced at Battalion in Saigon or in Manila.
I took part in some U-10 operations and threw out thousands of leaflets that were ordered from Saigon or Nha Trang.
By early 1966, Army psychological operations were being carried out by the 6th PSYOP Battalion stationed in Saigon.
Kihn Do Theater in Saigon after the theater was blown up on 1 December 1966
Headquarters was initially in the Kinh Do Theater in Saigon except for the radio and TV advisors, and the printing facilities, although a lot of paper and printing supplies were stored on the first floor where the seats had been.
In the fall of 1967, the battalion headquarters moved to the Saigon Railyards, now referred to as the Cruz Compound.
The 6th PSYOP Bn operated independent of the Saigon-based Vietnam Detachment of the 7th PSYOP Group.
JUSPAO Planning Office, Saigon, Vietnam, May, 1967 mentions the 245th PSYOP Company:
The 246th PSYOP Company served III Corps from Bien Hoa, about 20 miles northeast of Saigon in III Corps.
Because of the increased need for psychological warfare support, the 4th PSYOP Group was constituted in the Regular Army in Vietnam on 7 November 1967, and was activated on 1 December 1967 with headquarters in the Saigon Railyards (later, headquarters may have moved to the Tan Son Nhut Air Base near Saigon).
I was involved in setting up the first photo processing laboratory at 4th Group Headquarters in Saigon.
We therefore packed up and moved our operation to Saigon].
I don’t recall all the details, but I do remember going to shoot photographs of captured and surrendered Viet Cong after several battles in and around the Saigon area.
Army Specialist 5 James (Ski) Andrzejewski was an 83F (offset pressman) assigned to the 4th PSYOP Group in Saigon from 1968 to 1969.
Informed sources said the idea was presented to Leonard Marks, Director of the United States Information Service when he visited Saigon recently.
HHC 4th PSYOP Gp darkroom in Saigon, 1968.
printing facility in Saigon, 1968
Two dissident Vietnam Air Force pilots bomb the Independence Palace in Saigon in a failed attempt to assassinate South Vietnam President Ngô Đình Diệm.
Ho Chi Minh City, formerly named Saigon, is the largest city in Vietnam.
The 1962 South Vietnamese Independence Palace bombing in Saigon was an aerial attack on 27 February 1962 by two dissident Vietnam Air Force pilots, Second Lieutenant Nguyễn Văn Cử and First Lieutenant Phạm Phú Quốc.
1962 – Two dissident Vietnam Air Force pilots bomb the Independence Palace in Saigon in a failed attempt to assassinate South Vietnam President Ngô Ðình Di?m.
The first Communist tanks to arrive in Saigon rumbled here on 30 April 1975 and it’s as if time has stood still since then.
The new building was named Independence Palace and was home to the successive South Vietnamese president, Nguyen Van Thieu, until his hasty departure in 1975.
February 27, 1962 - The presidential palace in Saigon is bombed by two renegade South Vietnamese pilots flying American-made World War II era fighter planes.
Their primary mission, he has told them, is to protect him from any coups in Saigon.
"You are responsible for the present trouble because you back Diem and his government of ignoramuses," a leading Buddhist tells U.S. officials in Saigon.
South Vietnamese special forces, originally trained by the U.S. and now controlled by Diem's younger brother Nhu wage violent crackdowns against Buddhist sanctuaries in Saigon, Hue and other cities.
July 4, 1963 - South Vietnamese General Tran Van Don, a Buddhist, contacts the CIA in Saigon about the possibility of staging a coup against Diem.
President Kennedy then gives Lodge a free hand to manage the unfolding events in Saigon.
The CIA in Saigon then signals the conspirators that the United States will not interfere with the overthrow of President Diem.
At 1:30 p.m., during the traditional siesta time, the coup begins as mutinous troops roar into Saigon, surround the presidential palace, and also seize police headquarters.
While traveling to Saigon, the vehicle stops and Diem and Nhu are assassinated.
Saigon celebrates the downfall of Diem's regime.
August 21, 1964 - In Saigon, students and Buddhist militants begin a series of escalating protests against General Khanh's military regime.
The streets of Saigon soon disintegrate into chaos and mob violence amid the government's gross instability.
September 13, 1964 - Two disgruntled South Vietnamese generals stage an unsuccessful coup in Saigon.
November 1, 1964 - The first attack by Viet Cong against Americans in Vietnam occurs at Bien Hoa air base, 12 miles north of Saigon.
December 20, 1964 - Another military coup occurs in Saigon by the South Vietnamese army.
December 24, 1964 - Viet Cong terrorists set off a car bomb explosion at the Brinks Hotel, an American officers' residence in downtown Saigon.
There are now an estimated 170,000 Viet Cong/NVA fighters in the 'People's Revolutionary Army' which has begun waging coordinated battalion-sized attacks against South Vietnamese troops in villages around Saigon.
