Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy

He was shot by Sirhan Sirhan, a 24-year-old Palestinian on June 5, 1968, after Kennedy defeated Senator Eugene McCarthy in the California presidential primary.
The shooting was recorded on audio tape by a freelance newspaper reporter, and the aftermath was captured on film, which was subsequently aired on various news channels.
Sirhan Sirhan had opened fire on Kennedy in a crowded kitchen at The Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, California, hitting him three times and wounding five others.
Luis Donaldo Colosio: Mexican politician, economist, and PRI presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio was shot to death on March 23, 1994 at a campaign rally in Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico.
It should also be noted that Robert Kennedy most likely would have won the Democratic Presidential nomination had he not been assassinated after his California Primary victory on June 4, 1968.
San Francisco, Los Angeles and Seattle also attracted and harbored a sizable blues community, thanks to Janis Joplin, The Doors and Jimi Hendrix.
On January 13, 1968, Johnny Cash took his band, his father, and a couple of opening acts to California’s Folsom State Prison to record two shows.
The assassination of Robert Francis "Bobby" Kennedy, a United States Senator and brother of assassinated President John Fitzgerald "Jack" Kennedy, took place shortly after midnight on June 5, 1968, in Los Angeles, California, during the campaign season for the United States Presidential election.
RFK killer Sirhan Sirhan moved to another prison -- on anniversary of JFK assassination
Exactly 50 years to the day of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, his brother’s assassin, Sirhan Sirhan, was moved to a prison in San Diego County.
The California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation confirmed Friday that Sirhan was moved from Corcoran State Prison in central California to the Richard J. Donovan Correctional Facility in San Diego County’s South Bay area.
“As a routine matter of housing allotments, Sirhan Sirhan was moved from Corcoran State Prison to the RJ Donovan Correctional Facility in San Diego County today,” said Luis Patino, spokesman for the California Department of Corrections.
Sirhan – now 69 years old – shot Robert F Kennedy on Jun. 5, 1968 in the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles after Kennedy won the California presidential primary.
Kennedy had just finished addressing supporters in the hotel’s ballroom when he was fatally shot multiple times by Sirhan.
Sirhan was originally sentenced to death for the assassination of RFK, but the sentence was commuted to life in prison after the California Supreme Court declared the death penalty law in effect at the time, in 1972, as unconstitutional.
Date: June 5, 1968
Location: Los Angeles, California
After winning the California primary election for Democratic nomination for President of the United States, he was shot in the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel and died twenty-six hours later at Good Samaritan Hospital.
His assassin was Sirhan Sirhan, a Palestinian immigrant, but reviews of the shooting caught on audiotape suggest a possible second gunman present who shot a security guard.
Full text of Paul Schrade’s prepared remarks for delivery at Sirhan Sirhan’s February 10th Parole Suitability Hearing.
Transcription provided by Brad Johnson, Concept Producer for Rob Beemer, Interesting Stuff Entertainment, Los Angeles (Rob accompanied Paul Schrade to yesterday’s Sirhan parole hearing, acting as Mr. Schrade’s support person).
Update, 02/11/16: A California parole panel late yesterday denied Sirhan Sirhan’s parole application for a 15th time.
I am Paul Schrade of Los Angeles.
And back when I was 43, I was among six persons shot at the old Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles at just after Midnight on June 5th, 1968.
I was shot along with Senator Robert F. Kennedy, who had just won California’s Democratic Primary Election for the Presidency of the United States.
In order for you to make an accurate determination of Sirhan Sirhan’s parole, you need to know my feelings on this case and the full picture of what actually happened.
Gentlemen, the evidence clearly shows that Sirhan Sirhan could not and did not shoot Senator Bob Kennedy.
I believe, after you review these documents, that it should become clear to you that Sirhan Sirhan did not shoot – and could not have shot – Robert Kennedy.
Gentlemen, I believe you should grant Sirhan Sirhan parole.
In his letter to Mr. Holder, Bobby requests that federal authorities examine the Pruszynski Recording, the only known audio recording made of his father’s assassination at the Ambassador Hotel.
The recording was uncovered in 2004 at the California State Archives by CNN International senior writer Brad Johnson.
These documents are statements from two witnesses to the Robert Kennedy shooting, both of them assistant maître d’s for the Ambassador Hotel.
These two men, Karl Uecker and Edward Minasian, escorted Robert Kennedy into the kitchen pantry immediately after the Senator delivered his victory speech in a hotel ballroom for having won the California Primary.
These are documents from the Los Angeles Police Department that reveal LAPD misconduct in the police investigation of the Robert Kennedy murder.
Mr. Deputy District Attorney, based on all of this information and more, I ask that you inform Los Angeles County District Attorney Jackie Lacey that I am formally requesting her to order a new investigation of the Robert F. Kennedy assassination.
I will also be making the same request of Los Angeles Police Chief Charlie Beck.
Furthermore, Mr. Deputy District Attorney, I ask that you please also tell the District Attorney, Ms. Lacey, that I would appreciate the opportunity to personally meet with her in Los Angeles at her earliest convenience.
I hope you will consider all of the accurate details of this crime that I have presented in order for you to accurately determine Sirhan Sirhan’s eligibility for parole.
The best example of this can be found in this statement of Los Angeles District Attorney John Van de Kamp.
Again, gentlemen, I believe you should grant Sirhan Sirhan parole.
Robert Kennedy was assassinated on June 6th, 1968, in Los Angeles, California.
Robert Francis Kennedy was forty-two when he was shot down in Los Angeles.
He would win four out of five Democratic primaries and it looked as if he might well be the second Kennedy president when he went to California for the primary there.
Later that day the senator spoke in Los Angeles and San Diego before spending the night in Malibu, north of Los Angeles.
Kennedy played with his children on the beach before being driven in the evening to a suite in the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles to await the results.
The assassin was seized, but it was too late and Robert Kennedy was taken to the Good Samaritan Hospital, where he died the next day.
The assassin proved to be a Palestinian from Beirut named Sirhan Sirhan, aged twenty-four, whose Christian family had emigrated to California and settled in Pasadena in 1956.
On June 5, 1968, after RFK won the Democratic primary in California, he was shot down as he passed through the pantry of the Ambassador Hotel.
The official account maintains that he was taken out by a lone, demented gunman, Sirhan Sirhan, a Palestinian who had written, “RFK must die!”
Like the lone, demented gunman accused of assassinating his brother, John, both murders were products of conspiracies, where Sirhan Sirhan, like Lee Harvey Oswald, was designated as the patsy.
Robert F. Kennedy shot in Los Angeles on June 5, 1968.
- More bullets were fired in the pantry of the Ambassador Hotel than could have come from Sirhan Sirhan’s gun.
- The coroner’s report did not support the Los Angeles’ Police Department’s assassination scenario.
- The Los Angeles Police Department engaged in massive destruction of evidence from the pantry of the hotel because "it would not fit into a card file".
RFK: The Ambassador Hotel
The weapon removed from Sirhan Sirhan was a .22 caliber, eight-round revolver, with serial number H-53725 [2].
Dr. Noguchi’s medical report, however, did not agree with the Los Angeles Police report.
and in Los Angeles (where “We got the little bastard!”)
[59] Peter Dale Scott, Deep Politics and the Death of JFK, University of California Press, 1996.
Los Angeles, Thursday, June 6--Senator Robert F. Kennedy, the brother of a murdered President, died at 1:44 A.M. today of an assassin's shots.
The New York Senator was wounded more than 20 hours earlier, moments after he had made his victory statement in the California primary.
At his side when he died today in Good Samaritan Hospital were his wife Ethel; his sisters, Mrs. Stephen Smith and Mrs. Patricia Lawford; his bother-in-law, Stephen Smith; and his sister-in-law, Mrs. John F. Kennedy, whose husband was assassinated 4 1/2 years ago in Dallas.
The man accused of shooting Mr. Kennedy early yesterday in a pantry of the Ambassador Hotel was identified as Sirhan Bishara Sirhan, 24 years old, who was born in Palestinian Jerusalem of Arab parentage and had lived in the Los Angeles area since 1957.
The shots came moments after Senator Kennedy had made a speech celebrating his victory in yesterday's Democratic Presidential primary in California.
Senator Kennedy, accompanied by his wife, Ethel, was wheeled into the Good Samaritan Hospital shortly after 1 A.M. yesterday after a brief stop at the Central Receiving Hospital.
He was rushed to Los Angeles in an Air Force plane on instructions from Vice President Humphrey.
The snubnosed .22-caliber Iver Johnson Cadet model revolver seized after the shooting was described as having been picked out of a list of 2.5 million weapons registered in California in "just seconds" after the disclosure of its serial number.
The other victims of the shooting were Paul Schrade, 43 years old, a regional director of the United Automobile and Aerospace Workers Union, a prominent Kennedy campaigner; William Weisel, 30, a unit manager for the American Broadcasting Company; Ira Goldstein, 19, an employee of Continental New Service at nearby Sherman Oaks; Mrs. Elizabeth Evans, 43, of Sangus, in Los Angeles County, and Irwin Stroll, 17.
The court complaint against Sirhan charged that "on or about the fifth day of June, 1968, at and in the county of Los Angeles a felony was committed by John Doe, who at the time and place aforesaid, did willfully, unlawfully and feloniously commit an assault with a deadly weapon upon Robert Francis Kennedy, a human being, with the intent then and there willfully, unlawfully, feloniously and with malice aforethought to kill and murder the said Robert Francis Kennedy."
The bullets that struck Kennedy and the others wounded that night were from a .22, which is exactly what Sirhan Sirhan was carrying.
Thus, I have never said that Sirhan Sirhan killed Robert Kennedy."
Make no mistake though, Sirhan Sirhan shot Robert F. Kennedy on June 5, 1968.
Inventory of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department Records - Sirhan Sirhan Case File
Description  The Los Angeles Sheriff's Department records - Sirhan Sirhan case file contains twelve cubic feet of textual and photographic records covering the period of his confinement by the Sheriff's Department following the assassination of Senator Robert F. Kennedy in 1968.
The materials consist of two groups of records, the Sheriff's Department office files and a partial transcript of the proceedings during Sirhan Sirhan's trial.
Background  In the early hours of June 5, 1968, New York Senator Robert F. Kennedy addressed a crowd of his supporters at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles.
Senator Kennedy, a candidate for President of the United States, had just won the California Democratic Primary.
Winning the California primary was critical to his quest for the Democratic Party nomination.
Restrictions  For permission to reproduce or publish, please contact the California State Archives.
Permission for reproduction or publication is given on behalf of the California State Archives as the owner of the physical items.
The researcher assumes all responsibility for possible infringement which may arise from reproduction or publication of materials from the California State Archives collections.
In the few places where restrictions are noted, the justification is firmly rooted in California statutory law.
June 5, 1968
Shortly after midnight on June 5, 1968, presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy was shot three times by Palestinian immigrant Sirhan Sirhan after giving a speech at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, California.
On June 4, 1968, popular Democratic Party presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy waited all day for the election results to come in from the Democratic primary in California.
At 11:30 p.m., Kennedy, his wife Ethel, and the rest of his entourage left the Royal Suite of the Ambassador Hotel and headed downstairs to the ballroom, where approximately 1,800 supporters waited for him to give his victory speech.
As Kennedy travelled down this pantry corridor, which was filled with people trying to catch a glimpse of the potential future president, 24-year-old, Palestinian-born Sirhan Sirhan stepped up to Robert Kennedy and opened fire with his .22 pistol.
However, since Kennedy needed brain surgery, he was quickly transferred to Good Samaritan Hospital, arriving around 1 a.m.
What Happened to Sirhan Sirhan?
Once police arrived at the Ambassador Hotel, Sirhan was escorted to police headquarters and questioned.
Although he pleaded not guilty, Sirhan Sirhan was found guilty on all counts and sentenced to death on April 23, 1969.
Sirhan was never executed, however, because in 1972 California abolished the death penalty and commuted all death sentences to life in prison.
Sirhan Sirhan remains imprisoned in Valley State Prison in Coalinga, California.
For Robert Kennedy's assassination, there seem to be three main conspiracy theories that are based on inconsistencies found in the evidence against Sirhan Sirhan.
Los Angeles Coroner Thomas Noguchi conducted the autopsy on Robert Kennedy's body and discovered that not only had Kennedy died from the shot that entered just below and behind his right ear, but that there were scorch marks around the entry wound.
