Law school of Beirut

In 551, an earthquake demolished the city of Beirut.
The law school was temporarily moved to Sidon.
Only 'Berytus Nutrix Legum' written in Latin.
This means 'Beirut, Mother of Laws' the motto of the famous Law school of Beirut in the Roman Empire.
As a matter of fact, the Beirut Law School was the preeminent center of jurisprudence of the Roman Empire until its destruction in A.D. 551.
But on a July day in A.D. 551, an earthquake registering an estimated 7.6 on the Richter scale rocked the city, killing tens of thousands of people and toppling most of its monuments and buildings.
While not definitive evidence of the A.D. 551 earthquake, this new material may give archaeologists a chance to understand the calamity, which has only been known through textual sources.
Beritus (Berytus) Nutris Legum (Beirut Mother of Law), Roman School of Law
and jurisprudence arose at Berytus, which attained high distinction,
The course of education at Berytus lasted
five years, and included Roman Law in all its various forms, the works
were forced to study either at Berytus, or at Rome, or at
school, the town of Berytus being completely demolished by an
earthquake in the year A.D. 551.
Empire was Berytus.
lasted until the destruction of Berytus itself by a sequence of earthquakes,
and Dorotheus, professor in the great law school at Berytus, , to prepare
The 1st law school in the world was built in Beirut, Lebanon in 239 A.D. by the Roman Empire.
When this earthquake of might suddenly happened, the sea drew off and was poured back and restrained from the city of Berytus and from the rest of the cities of the seacoast of Phoenicia, and stood in a heap in its midst by the decree of God as far as a distance of two miles . . . (then) there came the great earthquake which overthrew the buildings of the cities, especially in Berytus.
It brought down and crushed those who had escaped from the sea . . . the sea was lifted up over their heads behind them, and the earthquake struck the city.
JEAN-PIERRE Asmar can call up on his computer the ghosts of the earthquake that destroyed Roman Beirut.
Berytus, as the Romans called their great port city on the Phoenician coast, was a pearl of the Roman Empire, a powerful commercial centre and, later, the site of perhaps the most famous law school of antiquity.
All of the work has been finished except for a continuing effort to uncover remnants of the Law School of Berytus, described in Roman, Byzantine and Arabic texts as the most prominent in the Roman Empire before Beirut was destroyed by an earthquake in A.D. 551.
Berytus (#Beirut)'s Roman motto was 'Nutris Legum', which translates to 'Mother of Laws', due to the Roman law school in the city, sigh!
Dorotheus taught jurisprudence in the school of Roman law at Berytus, Syria (now Beirut, Lebanon), at that time probably the best law school in the eastern Roman Empire.
Roman Berytus
Roman Berytus: Beirut in Late Antiquity.
Cyrillus, Greek jurist of the 5th century, was a professor in the ancient Law School of Berytus (present-day Beirut), and one of the founders of the oecumenical school of jurists (τῆς οἰκουμένης διδάσκαλοι).
Can she ever be herself again after the violent earthquake that levelled her completely in 551 AD?
When the Romans besiege the city under Emperor Augustus in 14 BC, she is rechristened as Colonia Julia Augusta Felix Berytus – Julia Augusta after Augustus' daughter.
Lamartine believes that this terre sainte, this happy Berytus, will be able to save his seriously ill daughter and make her as happy as the city that bears the daughter's name: Julia.
