Jena Six

Jena Six: Waiting for Justice
Issues of injustice, racism, and inequality relating to the Jena Six and other such polarizing incidents will be addressed at a panel discussion on Monday, October 29, from 6 to 8 p.m. in Goucher College’s Haebler Memorial Chapel.
The Jena Six refers to a group of six black teenagers who have been charged with the beating of Justin Barker, a white teenager at Jena High School in Jena, LA, on December 4, 2006.
and Marc McGeorge Jena 6 On December 4th, 2006, Justin Barker, a white student at Jena High School was assaulted by six fellow African American Students The events leading up to the assault of Barker included the hanging of nooses from a tree in the high school courtyard,two violent confrontations between black and white youths, and the destruction by fire to the main building of Jena High School From left-right: Theo Shaw, Mychal Bell, Robert Bailey Jr., Jesse Beard, Carwin Jones and Bryant Purvis.
Mychal Bell was tried as an adult due to his criminal record and because he was believed to initiate the attack
The rest of the Jena Six did not get tried as an adult even though Carwin Jones was 18 at the time
The Jena six were charged with attempted murder Six individuals, Robert Bailey, 17; Mychal Bell, 16; Carwin Jones, 18; Bryant Purvis, 17; Jesse Ray Beard, 14; and Theo Shaw, 17 were arrested in the assault on Barker.
Bell pled guilty to a reduced charge of battery and was sentenced to 18 months in Juvenile prison
The most notable rally occured on the day of Mychal Bell's trial in the town of Jena.
The Case of the Jena Six: Black High School Students Charged with Attempted Murder for Schoolyard Fight After Nooses Are Hung from Tree
Six black students at Jena High School in Central Louisiana were arrested last December after a school fight in which a white student was beaten and suffered a concussion and multiple bruises.
The fight took place amid mounting racial tension after a black student sat under a tree in the schoolyard where only white students sat.
Last December, six black students at Jena High School were arrested after a school fight in which a white student was beaten and suffered a concussion and multiple bruises.
The Jena Six, as they have come to be known, range in age from 15 to 17.
Just over a week ago, an all-white jury took less than two days to convict 17-year-old Mychal Bell, the first of the Jena Six to go on trial.
Black residents say race has always been an issue in Jena, which is 85 percent white and that the charges against the Jena Six are no exception.
The origins of the story can be traced back to early September, when a black high school student requested permission to sit under a tree in the schoolyard, where usually only white students sat.
JACQUIE SOOHEN: Jesse Beard, a freshman in high school and one of Jena Six, took us to where the nooses were hung.
JACQUIE SOOHEN: Robert Bailey, 17 years old and a safety receiver for the school football team, is another of the Jena Six facing life behind bars.
JACQUIE SOOHEN: The school’s superintendent dismissed the nooses as a prank, and after three days’ suspension, the three white students who hung the nooses were allowed back to school.
Later that month, a white student pulled a gun on a group of black students at a gas station, claiming self-defense.
No charges were ever filed against the white students in either incident.
Four days later, a white student was allegedly attacked in a school fight.
Two of the six, including Mychal Bell, who was recently convicted, were unable to make bond and have spent close to seven months in jail to date.
All of the Jena Six were athletes, and five of the six were on the high school football team.
Marcus Jones, the father of 17-year-old Mychal Bell, has a stack of scholarship offers for his son.
Mychal Bell faces up to 22 years in prison when he’s sentenced July 31st.
When we come back from break, we’ll be joined by parents of three of the Jena Six, as well as the journalist who broke the story nationally.
Jena High School
Jena High School
Website 	Jena High School
Another view of Jena High School
Jena High School is a secondary school located in Jena, Louisiana, United States.
The following schools feed into Jena High School:
Main article: Jena Six
On December 4, 2006 a fight broke out on campus, in which six African-American students assaulted a white student.
The Jena Six Hate Squad
Far from being intimidated by the nooses, both black and white students began “playing with them.
Matters took a turn for the worse on the last day of November 2006 when an arsonist(s) torched a wing of the Jena High School’s main building.
Racial harmony at Jena High had improved as the Jena Giants enjoyed a winning football season, thanks to efforts by its black players, among them Mychal Bell and Carwin Jones.
The Jena Six Wolf Pack Attacks
At that moment the white student was ambushed by six cowardly blacks who attacked Barker from behind without warning.
The white student lost consciousness instantly and collapsed, which sent his skull crashing against the pavement.
According to eyewitnesses, the gang’s ringleader, Mychal Bell, and his thug posse went to work enthusiastically and viciously stomping Mr. Barker’s skull and kicking his face and head as hard as they could kick.
Nonetheless, Mychal Bell had assembled a goon squad and ambushed a student who was no threat to them and Bell did it on school property during school hours.
Barker’s attackers were Mychal Bell,16, Carwin Jones,18, Bryant Purvis,17, Jesse Ray Beard,14, and, once again, Theodore Shaw,17, and Robert Bailey, Jr.,17.
From the beginning, the authorities believed that Mychal Bell was the ringleader and architect of the in-school stompfest.
Several eyewitnesses testified that they saw Mychal Bell strike Justin Barker.
District Attorney Reed Walters charged Mychal Bell as an adult with the crime of attempted murder.
Presidential hopeful Barack Obama demonstrated his unworthiness of high public office by stupidly declaring that the Jena Six “have earned the mantle of Rosa Parks.”
The thuggish Jena Six had launched a horrific surprise gang assault on an unsuspecting high-school student.
Rosa defended civil rights; the Jena Six had literally stomped on someone’s civil rights.
Writing for the Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jonathan Tilove opined: “The youths, known as the Jena Six, have emerged as an international cause celebre, latter-day Scottsboro Boys, exciting outrage and organizing on their behalf and trying Jena itself in the court of public opinion.”
The Duke students had emerged as the victims of racial and political bias – and much more akin to the Scottsboro Boys than the Jena Six head stompers who had committed an outrageous crime in front of lots of witnesses.
In a webpage titled “Jena 6 = Scottsboro Boys” the black avengers try to make a side-by-side comparison of the Scottsboro and Jena Six cases.
The avengers say of the Jena Six case that “Whites and Blacks fought.”
Justin Barker was savagely battered by the Jena Six thug posse in full view of witnesses.
Mychal Bell admitted striking Barker.
Mychal Bell’s jury was all white by default; the Parish had made a good-faith effort to create a racially-diverse jury pool – but they don’t drag in jurors off the street.
The black avengers claim that “The Black defendant’s lawyer was totally inept, having called no witnesses . . .” Here’s the truth: Mychal Bell was represented by public defender Blane Williams, himself a black man.
There were no “whites” in the Jena Six case; there was only the single unarmed white victim.
In desperation, some black moralists reached back three full lunar cycles to the one-hour noose display to make the case that the Jena Six are victims of unequal justice.
The Jena Six had committed a hate crime.
The recurring theme among the Jena Six defenders was the notion that the black thug posse was just getting even for something or other.
There was also a campaign to portray the Jena Six as martyrs of racial injustice or, at worst, rambunctious choir boys.
Here’s a typical example from the prestigious Washington Post: “Mychal Bell, the first of the six to be tried, is scheduled to be sentenced in September.
Mychal Bell is a notorious thug and a sadist; he cares little for the rules that define a civilized society; he is heedless of the rights of others.
Mychal Bell had been placed on probation until his 18th birthday – January 18th, 2008.
The same New York Times that had been diminishing the harm done to the victim of the Jena Six was more forthcoming in an October 2nd ‘07 article about sports injuries.
This is a far more grim and sober assessment of concussion-related brain injury than anything reported by the liberal media in stories about the Jena Six.
Justin Barker had sustained his first concussion when Mychal Bell launched his sneak attack.
The Jena Six had done all they could to inflict the maximum amount of damage on Justin Barker’s face, skull and brain.
In the Jena Six mob assault there were six robust young men who kicked the victim’s brain every which way with all the energy they could muster.
For that injury he is deserving of an ample civil settlement from the families of the wild-in-the-streets Jena Six.
The Reverend Al Sharpton met with Mychal Bell at the courthouse and relayed that Bell was heartened by the show of support and hoped it would remain peaceful.
“He doesn’t want anything done that would disparage his name – no violence, not even a negative word,” said Sharpton of Mychal Bell, a violent sadist with a string of battery convictions on his rap sheet.
In truth, Mychal Bell and his thug posse never stood for anything but hatred and low animal cunning.
The Jena Six confirmed their attachment to this ruinous subculture when Carwin Jones and Bryant Purvis made on-stage guest appearances at the BET Hip Hop Awards in Atlanta on October 13, 2007.
When Sharpton called the prosecution of the Jena Six mob attack “the most blatant example of disparity in the justice system” the attendees bobbed their heads as though they had never before heard him say that.
The same sort of twisted tribal group-think permeates the Jena Six imbroglio: blacks are distressed that the members of a thwarted lynch-mob attack are being prosecuted, while the three white jerks who dangled nooses from a tree limb are not being prosecuted.
Sharpton knows that the black community will never imagine the Jena Six to have been a racist lynch mob, because it’s a community that loudly denies that it is even possible for a black person to be a racist.
There was an easy way for the Jena Six to avoid all the inconvenience of a trial and the discomfort of imprisonment: abstinence.
“I was concerned about what was going on up there and thought the district attorney was a bit harsh in his treatment of Mr. Bell,” said the kindly doctor, who posted $5,400, the required 12% bond necessary to spring Mychal Bell from the slammer.
The NAACP announced that it was collecting cash for the Jena Six legal defense fund but the donation link on their website funneled all donations to the NAACP’s own donation bucket.
Attorneys for the first defendant to go to trial, Mychal Bell, say they have yet to receive any money from him.”
To date, contributions for the Jena Six total at least half a million dollars.
After that, Mychal Bell’s father popped up on Michael Baisden’s popular radio talk show and accused Color of Change founder James Rucker of using the funds unwisely.
Lots of folks raised money on the Internet by selling Jena Six T-shirts or invoking the Jena 6 cause.
As soon as the last of the Jena Six have been given a criminal sentence there will be enough documented evidence to proceed with civil trials of the Jena hate squad.
The Jena Six had been useful to the black community as unwitting characters in a bigger drama intended to distract our nation from the shameful excesses of The Hideous Duke Rape Hoax, during which the psychosexual underpinnings of a shared black mythology had been hung out like soiled underwear for all the world to examine.
The first to go on trial was Mychal Bell.
On September 26th, 2007, Governor Kathleen Blanco announced that Mychal Bell would be retried as a juvenile.
On October 11th, 2007, Mychal Bell entered juvenile court expecting one more routine hearing.
On December third the AP disclosed that Mychal Bell “is close to a deal that would allow him to plead guilty to a misdemeanor and avoid a second trial . . .” The next day the AP announced that Bell had “pleaded guilty Monday [the 3rd] to a battery charge that could result in his release from a detention center in about eight months.”
Under the deal, Bell pled guilty to second-degree battery in return for an 18-month sentence and got credit for the ten months he had been in slam.
From this dark perspective it’s easy for blacks to imagine that the brutal stomping of an unconscious white student by six hate-drenched black athletes was no big deal – certainly not as significant as the symbolism of a knotted rope.
But remember this: in over forty statements taken regarding the assault on Justin Barker not a single person – not one of the Jena Six – mentioned the one-hour noose display even one time.
The linkage between the noose display and the ambush attack on Justin Barker was created in order to dignify the Jena Six hate squad – to re-invent them as defenders of Black Dignity.
*On this date in 2006, the Jena Six were convicted.
They were six African American teenagers accused and convicted in the beating of Justin Barker, a white student at Jena High School in Jena, Louisiana.
Barker was injured in the assault by the members of the Jena Six, and received treatment for his injuries at an emergency room.
These events included the hanging of nooses from a tree in the high school courtyard, two violent confrontations between white and black youths, and the destruction by fire of the main building of Jena High School.
The incidents were often linked in the extensive news coverage regarding the Jena Six Black individuals (Robert Bailey, then aged 17; Mychal Bell, then 16; Carwin Jones, then 18; Bryant Purvis, then 17; Jesse Ray Beard, then 14; and Theo Shaw, then 17) were arrested in the assault on Barker.
One, Mychal Bell, was initially convicted as an adult of aggravated battery and conspiracy to commit aggravated battery.
The Jena Six case sparked protests as excessive and racially discriminatory.
Other responses included songs alluding to the Jena Six, and editorials and opinion columns, and Congressional hearings.
5 defendants plead no contest in 'Jena Six' case
The case was referred to as the "Jena Six."
Parents of the Jena Six say they heard Barker was hurling racial epithets, but Barker's parents insist he did nothing to provoke the beating.
The sixth defendant, Mychal Bell, pleaded guilty in December 2007 to a misdemeanor second-degree battery charge and was sentenced to 18 months in jail.
A guy who was charged with attempted murder as part of the notorious 'Jena Six' got a full ride to law school
In 2007, as a member of the "Jena Six," Theo Shaw, then 17, spent seven months in jail, unable to pay for bail after being accused of gang-beating a white student.
The Jena Six were initially charged with attempted second-degree murder for beating a student who had to go to the emergency room but who later attended a school event that same night.
Becoming a symbol for harsh punishments of young black males, Shaw and the other members of the Jena Six attracted national attention and support, culminating in a march attended by thousands of people in the small Louisiana town of Jena.
Shaw "insists that he played no role in the attack" on the white student, according to The Times-Picayune, but he eventually pleaded no contest, too.
Thousands Protest in Support of Jena Six
JEFFREY BROWN: Today’s marches in Jena, Louisiana, a town of about 3,500, were to protest the treatment of Mychal Bell and five fellow African-American high school classmates who have become known as the Jena Six.
AL SHARPTON: Free the Jena Six!
The troubles in Jena began last September, when a black student asked his principal if he could sit under this tree, known as the white tree, traditionally a gathering spot for Jena High School’s white students.
The three white students involved were suspended for the act but not charged with any crime.
That set in motion a string of racially motivated incidents, including a series of fights, a fire set in the main building of Jena High School, and then, in December, the beating of Justin Barker by Mychal Bell and five friends.
Last Friday, the conviction of Mychal Bell was overturned by the state court of appeals on grounds that he should have been charged as a minor.
Mychal Bell remains in custody, correct?
And he lamented, he said, that he couldn't find a way to actually charge those white students with any crime.
The fund has been working with the legal counsel for Mychal Bell.
I just came from a meeting with Mychal Bell's parents for a few minutes, and we know that it's important to be here.
Each one of these individuals has their own legal proceeding, even though people talk about them as the Jena Six.
But the other thing that's going on is the larger political movement here and the attention that is being brought by all the people around the country who gathered here today, and those that can't be here and support justice for not only the Jena Six, but for young black men and women who are being ensnared in the criminal justice system.
KNOE 8 News - Before the Trayvon Martin rallies, Ferguson's unrest, or the Chicago protest, there was the March for Justice in Jena Louisiana.
The Jena 6 were black teenagers convicted in the 2006 beating of Justin Barker , a white student who also attended Jena High School.
Mychal Bell Of ‘Jena Six’ Will Not Be Released Friday, Court Decides
Though his mother came to the courthouse with a fresh change of clothes, Mychal Bell, the only member of the so-called “Jena Six” who has remained in jail since the group’s arrest in December, was not released on bond Friday, according to CNN.
“We’ll be back,” shouted one Jena Six supporter outside the courthouse Friday.
Bell is the only member of the Jena Six to stand trial so far, and was convicted on two felony counts: second degree battery and conspiracy to commit same.
The decision not to release Bell comes after a highly charged week of protests in the small Louisiana town of Jena, where many civil rights leaders are decrying the case as an example of uneven justice (see “Thousands March On Louisiana Town To Support ’Jena Six’ “ ).
The tension in Jena originally rose after several white students hung nooses from a tree on the grounds of the Jena high school, harkening back to the days of Southern inequality and racism (see “Jena Six: What Sparked Protesters To Descend On Small Town In Louisiana?” )
Jesse Rae Beard is one of the 'Jena Six' students on trial
This World investigates the rise of discrimination in America's deep south as six black youths are charged with an alleged attack on a white student, which could see them jailed for up to 50 years.
It all began at Jena High School last summer when a black student, Kenneth Purvis, asked the school's principal whether he was permitted to sit under the shade of the school courtyard tree, a place traditionally reserved for white students only.
It was made worse when - despite the school head recommending the noose-hangers be expelled - the board overruled him and the three white student perpetrators merely received a slap on the wrist.
Caseptla Bailey with a picture of her son Robert, one of the 'Jena Six'
On 4 December, racial tension boiled over once more at the school when a white student, Justin Barker, was attacked by a small group of black students.
The drama focuses on six black Louisiana teens convicted of beating a white student after a noose was found hanging from a tree and addresses propaganda, individual freedoms and racial inequality in the judicial system.
The drama focuses on six black Louisiana teens convicted of beating a white student after a noose was found hanging from a tree and addresses propaganda, individual freedoms and racial inequality in the judicial system.
Written by Dominique Morisseau, “Blood at the Root” was inspired by the Jena Six, the teens convicted in the beating of Justin Barker, a white student at Jena High School, in 2006.
The conviction of the Jena Six was cited as an example of racial injustice in the United States, due to a belief that the defendants had been charged with too-serious offenses and had been treated unfairly.
What Lies Beneath the Jena Six Case in ‘Blood at the Root’
Sixty-seven years later, at Jena High School in Louisiana, six black teenagers were arrested and brought up on serious charges after assaulting a white student.
The case of the Jena Six was precipitated by several other charged incidents, including nooses being hung from a tree—a prank many said was rooted in something much darker.
When the central character, a black female student named Raylynn (played by Ayers), decides it’s time for change in her high school, she sits under a tree around which only white students regularly gather.
Things come to a head when six black students, including Raylynn’s brother, attack a white student and are then brought up on trumped-up charges.
Amid music, choral performances, and dance, each student explores his or her proximity to the events and determines their place within a tradition of hatred and segregation: a white female who feels more at home with the black community questions her place of privilege when racial tensions rise; a black student at the periphery of two communities attempts to disappear behind the conflicts, while his white peer argues for the importance of their engagement; a black student champions change while coming to terms with her own limited perspectives; a white student victimized by the conflict struggles at the juncture between his own marginalization and privilege; and the black male student whose life hangs in the balance of the scales of a biased judicial system is nearly silenced by social restraints.
Summary of the "Jena Six" Case
The next day, the first few students to arrive at Jena High School found three (some reports said there were only two) nylon-rope nooses hanging from the tree that had been referenced by the black questioner during the assembly.
Before long, Jena High administrators learned that three white students had hung the nooses as a “prank” which had no racial motivation.
When the school reopened on December 4, football player Mychal Bell led a gang of eight to ten fellow black students in pummeling a white 11th-grader named Justin Barker.
The assailants beat Barker into unconsciousness in what the Jena Times called “one of the most violent attacks in Jena High School’s history.”
(These were the individuals who became known collectively as the Jena Six.)
Mychal Bell, who was 16 years old at the time of the attack, was charged as an adult because he already had been on probation since being convicted of a December 2005 battery; moreover, he also had been convicted of two subsequent violent crimes and a property crime prior to his assault against Barker.
According to a September 2007 statement by the American Civil Liberties Union, “the Jena Six case raises serious questions about a possible double standard for whites and blacks in the criminal justice system -- and in our schools.”
In January 2008, journalist Charlotte Allen reported the following: “… Mychal Bell appeared with his team of lawyers at the parish courthouse in this tiny Central Louisiana town of 3,000 on December 3 [2007] and pled guilty to second-degree battery, to intentionally inflicting serious bodily injury on another person.
In doing so, Bell -- who … had repeatedly denied any involvement in the attack -- admitted that on December 4, 2006, he [had] hit 17-year-old Justin Barker from behind, slamming Barker's head against a concrete beam outside the gym at Jena High School and knocking him unconscious, and that he then joined a group in stomping and kicking Barker in the head.
The Jena Six controversy began in August 2006 when two Black students stood under the “white tree” during lunch break at Jena High School.
The tree and its shade had long been the preserve of white students, and the following day three nooses were found hanging from the tree.
Months of racial tensions followed, including several altercations between Black and white students.
On Dec. 4, a white student was knocked unconscious in a school fight.
Seventeen-year-old Mychal Bell, the first of the six youths to go on trial, faced as much as 22 years in prison after being convicted June 28 of aggravated battery and conspiracy by an all-white jury.
As the story of the Jena Six began to spread (especially on Black blogs and talk radio), national pressure on the town began to grow.
In the fall of 2006, Mychal Bell was a football hero, and his hometown, Jena, Louisiana, loved him for it.
But within weeks after the season’s end, Bell was transformed into a villain, accused of knocking out a white student, Justin Barker, who was then beaten by a group of black students.
By then, he, along with his co-defendants, had been transformed yet again: together, they’d been dubbed the Jena Six and had become icons of a 21st-century civil-rights movement.
The movement’s grievance wasn’t just the severe treatment of the Jena Six, but the light treatment of white youths who’d been in fights or hung nooses on a school tree—the “white tree”—after a black student asked if he could sit under it.
Mychal Bell, described in news reports as an “honor student,” turned out to have racked up, along with good grades, at least four previous juvenile offenses.
On MySpace, a picture appeared of one of the Jena Six posing with $100 bills coming out of his mouth, providing ammunition for those who said the families were milking the cause for money.
Anonymous readers posted the arrest record of Mychal Bell’s mother, and other allegations about the family, in an online forum of The Town Talk, a daily newspaper based in nearby Alexandria.
As it turned out, all of the Jena Six lived outside of Jena.
I found Melissa Bell, the 38-year-old mother of Mychal Bell, in one such black neighborhood, “The Quarters,” in the trailer she and her children have called home for the past four years.
Fowler, a jowly white man of 56 who says he was “like a granddaddy” to his players, told me of other incidents that he had heard about involving the crowd Bell ran with, which included some of the Jena Six.
Anlynne Hart, like her daughter, joined the protests against the charging of the Jena Six, but she also believes the whole drama need never have come to pass.
According to Fowler, Bell and another member of the Jena Six were written up so often that school officials asked the school board whether there was a policy on excessive infractions.
Nearly four decades earlier, Walters had played high-school football himself, in the nearby town of Olla, but he was no Mychal Bell.
By the time Mychal Bell turned 16, Walters had been reelected twice.
Walters remained convinced that everything he did in the case of the Jena Six was “absolutely 100 percent correct—without question.”
Mychal Bell was, in essence, a stranger.
That reality was not lost on Jena’s black residents, including Mychal Bell’s mother.
For all its noise, the Jena Six movement lacked a clear sense of where to apply its force.
But the Jena Six movement seemed like a mighty flood that left bent and broken twigs in its wake—and the contours of the riverbanks unchanged.
Less surprising is that the movement avoided the other side of Mychal Bell’s story: his own choices, for starters, or the link between the generational disintegration of black families and black incarceration.
The lip service about not excusing Bell’s past or the boys’ attack on Barker didn’t diminish the hagiography, which climaxed in a standing ovation for two of the Jena Six when they appeared as presenters at the Black Entertainment Television awards (dressed in hip-hop gear, which coach Fowler says they never wore in Jena).
Fowler, who spent his life in sports and education, had retired prematurely at the end of the school year, his spirit broken in part by the jailing of Bell and two other players who were part of the Jena Six.
Teenager in Jena Six Pleads Guilty to Lesser Charge
The youth, Mychal Bell, 17, was originally charged as an adult with attempted murder in the beating of Justin Barker in December 2006.
The charges against Mr. Bell and five other black students, who became known as the Jena Six, led to a civil rights demonstration in Jena in September.
