CSI effect

The CSI Effect in summary is the unrealistic public perception of the effectiveness and availability of forensic science in our criminal justice system, which is nurtured by the sensationalised presentations of forensic science within crime scene television dramas.
"strong prosecutor's effect" - CSI has increased juror expectations for forensic evidence.
The CSI effect is a belief held primarily among law enforcement personnel and prosecutors that forensic science television dramas, such as CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, influence American jurors to expect more forensic evidence in order to convict defendants of crimes.
Professionals worry that jurors may acquit guilty defendants because forensic evidence is not presented by the prosecution at trial.
Since the television shows gained popularity in the early 2000’s, juries have been on pins and needles when it comes to forensic evidence.
There are instances documented in news stories where jurors specifically request forensic evidence.
CSI syndrome
CSI infection
The CSI Effect has been defined as any of several ways in which the exaggerated portrayal of forensic science on crime television shows such as “CSI: Crime Scene Investigation” has influenced the public perception of the legal process.
The term most often refers to the phenomenon where jurors may come to demand more forensic evidence in criminal trials, thereby effectively raising the burden of proof for prosecutors.
There are many cases where jurors now demand expensive and often unnecessary DNA tests, handwriting analyses, gunshot residue testing, and other procedures that are not necessarily pertinent to the case; however since they have seen this on episodes of crime shows (Law and Order, Special Victims Unit, CSI, Criminal Minds, etc.), there is a belief that the legal proceedings are not viable without them.
Greater public awareness of forensic science has also increased the demand for forensic evidence in police investigations, inflating workloads for crime laboratories.
Our goal was to determine if there was any empirical evidence behind the commonly held beliefs that juror expectations for forensic evidence—and their demand for it as a condition for conviction—are linked to watching law-related television shows.
What role, then, did watching CSI play in the respondents' expectations and demands for forensic evidence?
That said, we believe it is crucial for judges and lawyers to understand juror expectations for forensic evidence.
[2] Editor's Note: For information on the National Institute of Justice's work on increasing the capacity of crime labs to process forensic evidence and reduce backlogs, see www.nij.gov/topics/forensics and www.dna.gov.
In a nutshell, the issue is whether frequent viewing of popular crime television shows, such as Crime Scene Investigations (CSI), influences legal decisions.
Some posited effects of CSI exposure are positive, such as greater awareness of forensic evidence and increased motivation among jurors.
However, the majority of effects are negatively framed, such as speculation that an unwarranted increase in defendant acquittals will ensue when forensic evidence, or its absence, does not match erroneous preconceptions engendered by fictional media portrayals of science.
A few Australian studies have examined the beliefs of forensic scientists about CSI effects.
A survey of Australian forensic scientists (n=69) revealed that all believed that forensic television programs exerted some negative effect on public perceptions of forensic science (Hanson, 2009).
Forensic laboratory scientists in New South Wales reported that the accumulated backlog at work was partly due to increased prosecutorial requests for DNA sample testing to accommodate jurors' increased focus on forensic evidence (Wise, 2009).
Unrealistic expectancies of forensic evidence
Frequent viewers expressed higher expectations that a homicide trial would include forensic evidence (Goodman-Delahunty & Hewson, 2010).
Findings published in the US and Australia have confirmed that CSI viewers believed they had a greater understanding of forensic evidence, expressed more confidence in their verdicts and were more sceptical about forensic scientific tests.
Where studies have included measures of mock jurors' beliefs in the realism of CSI shows, results have demonstrated that this is a more potent predictor.
In a realistic trial simulation directly testing the persuasive force of CSI-style forensic evidence, 150 jury eligible New South Wales citizens were not unduly persuaded by the sophisticated technological depictions presented by forensic experts (Goodman-Delahunty, Rossner & Tait, 2010).
Juror comprehension and the hard case: Making forensic evidence simpler.
The importance of DNA evidence to juries in criminal trials.
According to many American legal professionals, jurors in criminal trials increasingly favor forensic analysis over eye witnesses or circumstantial evidence, possibly as a result of popular television programs, such as CSI (Crime Scene Investigation), that inflate the role of forensics in the investigation and prosecution of major crimes.
That is the question behind several studies on the so-called CSI Effect: jurors who watch CSI or other crime dramas are influenced by the shows’ exaggerated portrayal of forensic science and measure their experience (and decisions) as a juror against fictional Hollywood standards.
According to the CSI Effect theory, jurors now demand scientific evidence in criminal trials and without such evidence, are less likely to convict.
In 2010, Shelton published a study that interviewed more than 2,000 jurors regarding their television-watching habits and expectations of scientific evidence in criminal trials.
But without a television scapegoat, what is to blame for high expectations of scientific evidence in criminal trials?
This is mainly because of the attention suddenly focused on forensic scientists, which has increased the demand for forensic evidence during investigations.
The basic definition is “any of several ways in which in exaggerated portrayal of forensic science on crime television such as “CSI: Crime Scene Investigation” influences public perception.”
the exaggerated portrayal of forensic science on TV shows that results in unrealistic public perceptions
What 4 ways does the CSI effect influence public perception of forensics?
Most of the impact seems to be on prosecution and forensic scientists, easy for defense lawyers to attack lack of forensic evidence
jurors expect more forensic evidence than is available or necessary
The CSI Syndrome (also known as the CSI Effect or the CSI Infection) is the non-medical term of exaggerated portrayal of forensic science on crime television shows such as CSI (Crime Scene Investigation) and its seemingly endless spin-offs influences public perception.
The CSI Syndrome also gives the false impression that forensic evidence is becoming more and more important, even while it is known that this sort of evidence can be manipulated.
