Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act

Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act Law & Legal Definition
The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act of 1956 intents to improve the mental health care in the state of Alaska.
to assist in providing for the Territory necessary facilities for a comprehensive mental-health program in Alaska, including inpatient and outpatient facilities; and
The Act established the Alaska Mental Trust Authority to carry on the objectives of the act.
The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act controversy
Today, in the process of researching something, I landed on Wikipedia to find this fascinating story highlighted about the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act.
Also notable was how the intent of the act was subverted after its passing, as susccessive Alaska administrations attempted (successfully) to starve the program of resources, until they were forced to wind back the cut-backs by the Alaska Supreme Court.
It seems that a major plank of their anti-psychology worldview is based on what happened in the Alaska situation.
In 1956, Smith joined a campaign against the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act, and denounced it as being part of a communist plot to hospitalize and brainwash Americans.
The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act (aka: The Siberia Bill) was talked about by David Miscavige in his intervview with Ted Koppel on Nightline some years ago.
I was curious about this bill that was before Congress in 1956.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alaska_Men ... abling_Act
Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act - Scientology and The Alaska Mental Health Bill - Conspiracy Theories
According to David Miscavige, the bill was the product of a conspiracy by the American Psychiatric Association.
In a public address in 1995, he told Scientologists that it was "in 1955 that the agents for the American Psychiatric Association met on Capitol Hill to ram home the infamous Siberia Bill, calling for a secret concentration camp in the wastes of Alaska."
In fact, the original version of the bill with the offending Title I commitment provisions only passed the House of Representatives; it was subsequently amended in conference to strike the commitment portion and retain the transfer of responsibility for mental health care.
Scientology continuing to promote conspiracy theories…
Specifically, it concerns the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act of 1956.
While the article in question has a number of factual errors, its focus is the claim that the bill intended to set up a “Siberia USA,” a series of camps in the Alaskan wilderness to which dissidents would be confined.
Overholser proposed the Alaska Mental Health Act, supported by the APA and NAMH.
This act would have instituted the Overholser/Felix commitment procedures at federal level, allowing anyone in the US to be picked up and shipped to a mental hospital in Alaska.
This Bill received scant public attention, and passed unanimously in the House of Representatives in January 1956.
(The Daily Alaska Empire, Feb 20, 1956)
It now called for psychiatric facilities to be built in what was then the relatively unpopulated territory of Alaska.
The person would then be shipped off to Alaska for confinement and “treatment.”
(H.R. 6376, 1956)
There are a number of problems with this analysis, not least the fact that the bill applied specifically to Alaskans, not to “anyone in the USA.”
Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alaska_Mental_Health_Act
Legislative history: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3f/1956_Alaska_Mental_Health_Enabling_Act_legislative_history.pdf
While Goldwater was a staunch anti-Communist, he rejected the fringes of the anti-Communist movement and in 1956 sponsored the passage of the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act to establish mental health care in Alaska.
He faced fierce opposition from the far right who claimed that the Act was a communist plot in order to “brainwash” Americans.
Pretty ludicrous and undeniably FRINGE…but, it does sound an awful lot like what a current conservative Alaskan might suggest…
(a) Mental health trust land shall be managed consistent with the trust principles imposed on the state by the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act, P.L. 84-830, 70 Stat.
709 (1956).
Group hopes for information on Alaskans sent to Morningside
Ketchikan, Alaska - For more than half a century, the territory of Alaska had no facility to deal with mental illness or developmental disabilities.
As a result between 1904 and the early 1960s, Alaskan residents who needed such a facility were sent Outside, nearly all went to Morningside Hospital in Portland.
At least 3,500 Alaskans ended up at Morningside and many lived out their days there, never seeing Alaska or their families again.
In 1904, Dr. Coe was awarded a contract from the US Department of the Interior to care for mentally ill and handicapped patients from Alaska.
The Alaskan patients, approximately 3,500 of them, would make up the majority of Morningside's patients over the next five decades.
In 1955, Oregon U.S. Rep. Edith Green moved to transfer care of Alaskan patients back to Alaska.
Also among Green's charges, according to a 1956 article in the Oregonian newspaper was that Coe used patients for labor on the home and covered it up as "occupational therapy."
Morningside was fully reaccredited by 1957, but by then Alaska was moving toward statehood and was making plans for dealing with the mentally ill and handicapped in the state.
As the Alaskans were transferred north, the Coe family attempted to find other sources of clients and began taking local people.
The door to transferring Alaskans back home was further opened by Public Law 84-830, known as the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act of 1956.
It was an Act of Congress passed to improve mental health care in the United States territory of Alaska.
(Editor's Note: The bill became the focus of a major political controversy at the time after opponents nicknamed The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act of 1956 the "Siberia Bill" and denounced it as being part of a communist plot to hospitalize and brainwash Americans.
In 2008, an effort began to document the Alaskans who were sent to Morningside, many of whom never returned to Alaska.
“The Lost Alaskans: The Morningside Hospital Project” maintains a website that includes patient records on many of the Alaskans who were interned at the facility.
As part of its efforts, the non-profit group is trying to search out the records and come to a proper accounting of all the Alaskans who were sent to Morningside.
Apparently the oft told tale of miners going stir crazy in their isolated cabins in Alaska was not unusual, at least in the first couple of decades of the 20th Century.
In the early territorial days, mental illness was considered a crime in Alaska, therefore many of the Alaskans who were sent to Morningside had been convicted of crimes initially and spent time in the legal system and some of Morningside's records are from those sources as well.
Frequently many of these individuals were apparently released in a fairly short period of time and returned to Alaska or to relatives in the Lower 48.
Like most of the Alaskans who died at Morningside, J.J. was buried in a Portland Cemetery and not returned to Alaska.
In 1956, conservatives rallied to oppose the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act, because they believed it would give the Alaskan government excessive control, similar to the control wielded by governments in places such as Russia and China.
Conservatives feared the Alaskan government would unconstitutionally relegate politically uncooperative residents to concentration camp-like institutions.
They warned Alaska would become “Siberia, USA.”
The debate came to a head at the Subcommittee hearings of 1956, where the Senate members and the zealous conservatives debated the allegedly Communist aspects of the bill.
The debate over the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act of 1956 was significant to America because although the intent of the opposition was not fulfilled, the conservative advocacy later was a major factor in the failures of deinstitutionalization throughout the United States.
The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act (AMHEA) was “written by the territory of Alaska to hospitalize its own mentally ill residents” (Nickerson 118).
In 1955, when the bill was proposed, Alaska was not yet a state, and therefore did not have the authority to institutionalize mentally ill people who posed a threat to their communities.
Instead, after notification from the Alaskan government, the federal government provided funds for mentally ill Alaskans to travel to a private institution in Oregon.
If the legislation passed, the government of Alaska would have the authority to build its own asylums and institutionalize its own residents.
In this way, the groups believed, the Alaskan government would have excessive control over its people.
They warned Alaska would become “Siberia, USA.”
Upset by this upsurge in psychology, many conservative Americans felt threatened and worried, and the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act gave them their opportunity to attack the growing field of psychology.
The men claimed that the building of the center was part of a communist plot (Torrey 172).
The debate came to a head during the Subcommittee hearings of February and March of 1956.
Senators like George Malone and protestors like George Kaspar debated whether the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act should be passed by the Senate.
Stephanie Williams, the founder of the American Public Relations Forum, testified in front of the Subcommittee, claiming that if the government gave Alaska land for the asylums, Russia could buy the land from the territory.
They already say Alaska belongs to them” (Daily Alaska Empire).
The opposing sides of the debate over the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act came together during the Senate Subcommittee hearings.
Although the heated controversy slowed the passage of the AMHEA, on July 10, 1956, after “less than ten minutes of debate” among the senators, the bill was passed (Torrey 14).
Senators assured their constituents that the bill would not allow Alaska to place innocents under the control of the government.
The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act passed despite the resistance.
The Senate Subcommittee disagreed with the zealous conservatives, and attempted to explain why the bill would be beneficial to Alaska and the United States.
The debate over the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act was truly caused not by fear of mental institutions but by trepidation of government control.
