Accurate News And Information Act

...Royal Assent in Britain, Australia and Canada...
In 1937, the Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta, John Campbell Bowen refused Royal Assent to three bills proposed by the Social Credit government.
Two involved the provincial government taking control of the banks, the Accurate News and Information Act, would have required newspapers to print replies by the government to stories in the press.
All were subsequently found by the courts to be unconstitutional.
In a cold Alberta winter, the premier forced the Lieutenant –Governor to abandon Government House and withdrew his transport.
The Edmonton Journal was founded on Nov. 11, 1903, by three local businessmen—John Macpherson, Arthur Moore and J.W. Cunningham—as a rival to the 23-year-old Edmonton Bulletin, Alberta‘s first newspaper.
After taking issue with Alberta Premier William Aberhart‘s attempt to pass the Accurate News and Information Act in 1937,  the Journal became the first non-American newspaper to be honoured by the Pulitzer Prize committee.
His words inspired the people of Alberta and a new political party was born: the Social Credit Party.
William "Bible Bill" Aberhart was a stout, earnest-looking Baptist minister and one of the first preachers in Canada to use the radio to spread the word of God.
His Sunday afternoon broadcasts were a beacon of light for Albertans in the first grim years of the Depression.
The plan was simple; Albertans could buy their way out of the economic crisis.
The grassroots movement grew into the Social Credit Party when other Alberta political parties showed little interest in adopting Aberhart's ideas.
Alberta was mired in the Depression.
At the same time, the ruling provincial party, the United Farmers of Alberta, was caught up in a sex scandal involving Premier John Brownlee and a 22-year-old government stenographer.
In September 1935, Social Credit took 56 of 63 seats in the Alberta legislature and swept the United Farmers of Alberta from office.
Aberhart's solution was to have Alberta print its own money, a move that was denounced in the press as dictatorial.
The Supreme Court declared that the certificates weren't legal tender and that the banking laws were unconstitutional.
William Aberhart's original Social Credit Party doctrine was replaced with Manning's more conservative financial and social politics.
Reference Re Alberta Statutes
Facts: This case considers the validity of three provincial acts of Alberta.
The reasoning reproduced in the case book is with regards to the Alberta Accurate News and Information Act.
Sections 3 and 4 of the Act provide that newspapers published in Alberta must perform duties on the demand of the "Chairman" of the Board constituted by s. 3 of The Alberta Social Credit Act.
(s. 3 basically allows the Chairman to dictate what newspapers can say about government policy.
Issue: Is the Alberta Accurate News and Information Act intra vires the legislature of Alberta?
- Also, the Bill seems to be part of the general scheme of Social Credit legislation under the Alberta Social Credit Act and thus presupposes that the latter is validly enacted, which it is not.
- BNA Act contemplates legislative power for Canada being vested in one Parliament, and a House of Commons as being a representative body, working under the influence of public opinion and discussion.
Not only does the Parliament of Canada undoubtedly possess authority to legislate for protection of this right, it would be beyond the power of provincial legislatures to "abrogate this right ... or to suppress the traditional forms of the exercise of its right."
- Alberta's legislature does not have capacity under s. 129 to alter the law by legislation "obnoxious to the principle stated."
- The legislation gives the Chairman autocratic powers which "could, if arbitrarily wielded, be employed to frustrate in Alberta these rights of the Crown and the people of Canada as a whole."
- This bill deals with the regulation of the press of Alberta, not in the context of "private wrongs or civil injuries resulting from any alleged infringement or privation of civil rights which belong to individuals, considered as individuals, but from the viewpoint of public wrongs or crimes, i.e., involving a violation of the public rights and duties to the whole community, considered as a community, in its social aggregate capacity."
- So, the matters dealt with in this bill are not purely private and local: the Act tends to nullify Albertan inhabitants' political rights AND the political rights of citizens of Canada.
Ratio (Duff C.J. and Davis J.): "[T]here is a very wide field in which the provinces undoubtedly are invested with legislative authority over newspapers; but the limit, in our opinion is reached when the legislation effects such a curtailment of the exercise of the right of public discussion as substantially to interfere with the working of the parliamentary institutions of Canada as contemplated by the provisions of The British North America Act and the statutes of the Dominion of Canada."
A Tradition of Vigilance: The Role of Lieutenant Governor in Alberta
A contemporary misconception exists in Canada that the Governor General and the Lieutenant Governors are politically impotent.
Using the province of Alberta as an example, this article looks at the ways various Lieutenant Governors have exercised the powers given to them by law and convention.
The Lieutenant Governor in Alberta
Alberta has a long history of interventionist Lieutenant Governors going back to the years of Social Credit and William Aberhart.
The Social Credit period in Alberta, especially between 1936 and 1938, witnessed considerable intervention by both the Lieutenant Governor and the Governor General.
On March 31, 1936, in a letter to the Premier, Walsh noted, “I have a very great objection on principle to the enactment by Order-in-Council of legislation which should be enacted by statute.”
5 Walsh warned such legislation would further batter Alberta’s damaged financial reputation and that the proposed Act might be ultra vires as it encroached upon the banking jurisdiction exclusive to the Dominion government.
Second, send the legislation for review to the Supreme Court of Alberta.
The Supreme Court of Alberta did review this legislation, renamed the Reduction and Settlement of Debts Act.
It is likely that Walsh – a former Alberta Chief Justice and earnest opponent of the Act - played a role in alerting the courts.
In February 1937, Mr. Justice A.F. Ewing of the Supreme Court of Alberta ruled the Reduction and Settlement of Debts Act unconstitutional.
By 1937, the regularity of unconstitutional bills passed by the Alberta legislature made it necessary for a mode of intervention independent from time consuming judicial reviews: vice-regal intervention by both Alberta’s Lieutenant Governor and Canada’s Governor General.
Alberta’s longest serving Lieutenant Governor was John Campbell Bowen.
Bowen was roundly criticized during the Constitutional Crisis of 1937-38 for demonstrating weakness unbecoming of a Lieutenant Governor.
Mackenzie King would note in his diary on February 1, 1938: “…had conservation with the Lieutenant Governor Bowen of Alberta who impressed me as a very delicate man, and not altogether suited for the post he occupies…” Nonetheless, he was largely able to overcome this.
When William Aberhart assumed office of premier of Alberta in 1935, he asked for eighteen months to establish a new order, which would free Albertans from the economic evils of the Great Depression.
On August 16, 1937, Arthur Meighen corresponded with Senator William Griesbach, foreshadowing the intervention of the Federal government and the Lieutenant Governor.
“What cannot be forgotten” Meighen wrote, “is that the people of Alberta are still citizens of Canada and they are still entitled to the safeguards of our Constitution.
In August 1937, Aberhart’s government, eager to implement social credit economics passed the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, the Bank Employees Civil Rights Act and the Judicature Act Amendment Act.
In an early letter dated August 11, Prime Minister Mackenzie King had requested that William Aberhart first send the legislation for review to the Supreme Court of Canada to judge its constitutionality.
9 The Judicature Act Amendment Act absurdly proposed what was tantamount to an unilateral Constitutional amendment by stating that “No action or proceeding of any nature whatsoever concerning the Constitutional validity of any enactment of this Legislative Assembly of the Province shall be commenced, maintained, continued or defended, unless and until permission…has first been given by the Lieutenant Governor in Council.”
This is not to say that Bowen remained unconcerned over the August 1937 legislation.
In fact, on the last day of session, August 6, Bowen called on Premier William Aberhart and the Attorney General John Hugill to discuss the constitutionality of the proposed Acts.
On the afternoon of Friday, August 6th, 1937 shortly before the special session prorogued I went with you for an audience with the Lieutenant Governor in his room at his request.
Of greater surprise, was Bowen’s granting Royal Assent to the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, the Bank Employees Civil Rights Act and the Judicature Act Amendment Act¸ over the concerns of the Attorney General.
As foreshadowed earlier that year by Walsh, legislation that violated the Constitutional division of provincial and federal powers would result in disallowance by the Governor General-in-Council, which promptly occurred on August 17, 1937.
Federal Justice Minister, Ernest LaPointe, remarked to the House of Commons, “The statutes of Alberta in question constitute an unmistakeable invasion of the legislative field thus assigned to Parliament.
11 Aberhart refused to fulfil his obligation to publish the disallowance in the Alberta Gazette so the federal government published the disallowance in the Canada Gazette.
In response to the disallowance, James Mackinnon, Liberal MP for Edmonton West, and the only Liberal MP in Alberta, proposed a course of action for the Lieutenant Governor in September 1937.
If Aberhart were to re-introduce the bills in the Legislative Assembly for the fall session, the Lieutenant Government should refuse Royal Assent.
In the event that Aberhart asked for dissolution of the legislature with the intent of making the federal disallowance an election issue, the Lieutenant Governor should refuse the request and instead commission Alberta Liberal Leader E.L. Gray as Premier.
Lieutenant Governor Bowen conveyed this plan to the federal government as Mackenzie King memorialized in his diary on September 28, 1937.
Perhaps predictably, the new legislation included new unconstitutional provisions.
These were apparent in the Bank Taxation Act, an Act to amend the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act and the Act to ensure the publication of accurate news and information.
12 The recently disallowed Credit of Alberta Regulation Act was “rewritten to drop all reference to the banks and substitute the words ‘credit institutions.’
The Accurate News and Information Act required that every Alberta newspaper publish any statements furnished by the chair of the Social Credit party “which has for its objective the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the Government of the Province.”
The bill further directed that newspapers could be ordered to reveal in writing all sources of their information and the names and addresses of such sources … [as well as] writers of  any editorial, articles, or news item appearing in their papers.
The new legislation generated further anxiety and concern in both Ottawa and Alberta.
On October 1, 1937, Bowen wrote to Aberhart with respect to the proposed An Act to Amend and Consolidate the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act.
16 On October 6, 1937, the Lieutenant Governor announced his reservation of the Bank Taxation Act, An Act to amend the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act and the Act to ensure the publication of accurate news and information for the Governor General-in-Council who sent the bills on to the Supreme Court for review.
The following spring the Supreme Court of Canada would determine that all three were in fact ultra vires.
On October 9, 1937, Mackenzie King met with Governor General Lord Tweedsmuir.
After gossiping about the scandalous abdication of King Edward VIII, they settled into the matter of the Alberta Legislation, and, as Mackenzie King recounted in his diary,
He asked me as to whether I had advised Bowen of Alberta re reserving bills.
On September 30, the Aberhart referred the question of disallowance to the Supreme Court of Canada.
In Alberta, Aberhart was deeply upset at the Lieutenant Governor and publicly swore revenge.
In March 1938, the committee of supply of the Alberta Legislature took unequivocal action and eliminated all grants for the upkeep of Government House effective March 31, 1938.
The Lieutenant Governor began to implement an accelerated version of the Mackinnon plan proposed in September 1937.
Bowen approached E.L. Grey, the Alberta Liberal Leader who would note,
The removal of Aberhart and the end of Social Credit in Alberta seemed imminent.
Mr. Gardiner and Mr. Mackinnon came to the office to talk over the Alberta situation before going to Council.
The present Lieutenant Governor wants to dismiss the Alberta ministry, and has asked Grey to form a ministry, which is to be one composed of the different political parties of the Province.
Action of the kind would almost certainly have repercussions in Saskatchewan, which would cause the Liberals the election there, and might bring on a sort of civil war in Alberta.
Norman Ward has argued that, “his near dismissal [of William Aberhart] was not a partisan matter, in which an unprincipled representative of the monarch sought to rid himself of a premier whose views he considered dangerous.
It is an enduring part of Alberta’s political memory, a legacy continued by Alberta Lieutenant Governors Ralph Steinhauer, Gordon Towers, Bud Olsen, Lois Hole and – most recently – Norman Kwong.
Throughout his tenure, Ralph Steinhauer, Alberta’s first Aboriginal Lieutenant Governor, championed native rights in the province in opposition to the policies of Premier Peter Lougheed.
In July 1976, several Alberta native chiefs joined Steinhauer at ceremonies hosted by the Queen at Buckingham Palace in commemoration of the signing of Treaties 6 and 7.
24 Although, a Royal Visit to Canada was planned for the following year, Steinhauer argued, “Alberta’s Indians attach special significance to their being able to travel to visit her in her own home.”
As the Calgary Albertan reported on April 18, 1977, the amendments were aimed at,
…blocking any attempt by Alberta Indians to declare an interest in land in the northern area of the province, including the Athabasca oil sands.
The provincial government, worried by comments made when the Supreme Court of Canada ruled on a similar point recently, rushed in with amendments to plug any possible loopholes that might favour the Indian case.30
The Supreme Court decision in question was the Paulette Caveat Case in the Northwest Territories, which concerned the Alberta government to the extent that the Attorney General of Alberta unsuccessfully petitioned the court to intervene.
Steinhauer had been asked to refuse Royal Assent by native leaders including the prominent leader of The Métis Association of Alberta, Stan Daniels whose press release of May 2, 1977 read,
The Alberta Human Rights and Civil Liberties Association apprised the Lieutenant Governor of their objections on May 5, 1977 recommending the Alberta Attorney General refer the legislation to the Alberta Supreme Court to determine whether it violated the Alberta Bill of Rights.
Grant Notley, leader of the Alberta New Democrats, raised the question of whether or not Lougheed had intervened in the Alberta Legislature.
On November 6, 1981, Eugene Steinhauer, President of the Indian Association of Alberta and brother of the former Lieutenant Governor, wrote to Premier Peter Lougheed noting that the provincial government had ratified the Constitution binding native groups without consultation,
In this case we must tell you that the Alberta government has no legal or Constitutional jurisdiction to speak on our behalf in England.39
A Lieutenant Governor with a strong consideration for native rights might have provided recourse for natives and averted the travesty of failing to include Canada’s first nations in the Constitutional negotiations of 1978 to 1982.
Keith Brownsey has compared the number of bills passed by the Alberta Legislature with the number of orders-in-council signed by the Lieutenant Governor.
Circumventing the Legislature is part of the problem with the parliamentary process in Alberta.
Alberta’s history of large majority governments has entrenched the practice of public spending via Orders-in-Council the approval of which is at the discretion of the Lieutenant Governor.
Some Alberta Lieutenant Governors have felt compelled to remind the executive that this process subverts and circumvents the democratic process.
In February 1993, Lieutenant Governor Gordon Towers refused the advice of one of his Alberta ministers when he declined to sign an Order-in-Council that he felt inappropriate.
At least one Alberta cabinet minister expressed surprise at Lieutenant Governor Tower’s intervention.
One need look no further than the two most recent incumbents, Lois Hole and Norman Kwong for examples of intervention by Alberta Lieutenant Governors.
It is clear the remark was not intended to threaten the Premier with a withholding of royal assent.
As Tupper wrote, “…my view is that a Lieutenant Governor not giving assent to a bill passed by a majority government would be unconstitutional.
She ensured that the Premier would have the best interests of Albertans in mind.
The reactions provided by political observers seemed rather unusual considering that Alberta has had a tradition of interventionist Lieutenant Governors since it had become a province.
On January 21, 2005 during his installation ceremony at Government House, Alberta’s new Lieutenant Governor, Norman Kwong, provoked controversy over his comments on Alberta’s proposed smoking ban.
53 While these comments were contrary to the Premier’s position  they did not conflict with the established positions of several government departments and organizations, which found the proposed ban helpful to the general health of Alberta’s citizenry.
The proponents for the smoking ban included AADAC (Alberta Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) whose senior manager for tobacco reduction Lloyd Carr argued, “The more you limit the places where people can smoke, the more quit attempts they will make.”
The Regina Leader Post reported that “newly appointed Alberta Lt.-Gov.
The criticisms were echoed by members of the general public including one Thomas Koch of Spring Lake, Alberta, who criticized the Lieutenant Governor,
Whatever Happened To… The Edmonton Journal and Freedom of the Press in Canada
Every person who is the proprietor, editor, publisher or manager of any newspaper published in [Alberta], shall when required to do so by the Chairman [of the Social Credit Board], publish in that newspaper any statement furnished by the Chairman which has for its object the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the Government of the Province published by that newspaper within the next preceding thirty-one days.
– Alberta Accurate News and Information Act (Bill 9, 1937)
The Charter of Rights and Freedoms is 30 years old now and many will mistakenly assume that it was the beginning of human rights in Canada.
What did human rights look like in Canada during the 115 years before the Charter was passed?
The Supreme Court of Canada tacitly acknowledged it in the 1953 case of Saumur v. City of Quebec.
The famous Alberta Press case is one of the best examples of this early conception of the Implied Bill of Rights.
For Alberta, the solution to the Depression came in 1935 in the form of a new Social Credit party and a landslide government, led by William Aberhart, which captured 56 of the 63 seats in the Alberta legislature.
Since “the existing means or system of distribution and exchange of wealth is considered to be inadequate, unjust and not suited to the welfare, prosperity and happiness of the people of Alberta,” the government sought to inaugurate a “new economic order” upon the theory known as “Social Credit.”
Among other tasks, this Board appointed the Provincial Credit Commission to determine the value of “Alberta Credit,” defined by the legislation as “the unused capacity of the industries and people of the Province of Alberta to produce wanted goods and services.”
The Provincial Treasury would maintain the Provincial Credit Account from which $25/month Credit Certificates to increase the purchasing power of Albertans would be issued to stimulate the economy.
The idea was to establish a system of circulating credit that constantly reflected the economic capacity of Alberta to produce goods and services.
The Alberta media were united in strenuous and vocal opposition to these wacky economic and social policies of the new Social Credit government.
The newspapers relentlessly criticized and ridiculed the inexperienced government.
He bitterly commented during his weekly Christian radio show that he was “glad there will be no newspapers in heaven”.
In addition to the Bills to excessively tax the Alberta operations of big banks, and license new credit institutions in Alberta, the government in 1937 demanded fair play from the newspapers.
One judge of the Supreme Court of Canada would characterize it thus:
It is, therefore, essential to control the sources of information of the people of Alberta, in order to keep them immune from any vacillation in their absolute faith in the plan of the Government.
The Social Credit doctrine must become, for the people of Alberta, a sort of religious dogma of which a free and uncontrolled discussion is not permissible.
1 Alberta’s Lieutenant-Governor at the time, John C. Bowen, took the unprecedented step of reserving Royal Assent on the three Bills and the federal Governor-General referred the constitutionality of these three Bills to the Supreme Court of Canada It is reported that the Social Credit government was so enraged by Bowen’s reservation that it promptly revoked his official residence, vehicle and budget for clerical staff in retaliation.
Within five months of Lieutenant-Governor Bowen’s reservation, the validity of the three challenged Bills – wrapped into a single case called the Reference re: Alberta Statutes, [1938] S.C.R. 100 was decided by the Supreme Court of Canada.
The judges of the Court unanimously agreed that the first two bills, relating to the taxation of federal banks and creation of Alberta credit institutions, were not within the power of any provincial legislature.
The Press Bill (Accurate News and Information Act) was also found to be outside of Alberta’s legislative authority.
Some judges reasoned that this Bill was unconstitutional because it was part of a broader unconstitutional legislative package, namely the Social Credit economic reforms.
The Chairman of the Social Credit Board, for example, who could issue requests and orders to the newspapers, was established under the general Social Credit legislation.
Other judges said that, even as an independent enactment, it exceeded Alberta’s power under section 129 of the Constitution Act, 1867 because:
it reduced the political rights of Albertans compared with residents of other provinces, or
This strengthened the construct of an Implied Bill of Rights in the Constitution Act, 1867, which itself only generally existed to assign sovereign legislative powers between the federal and provincial levels of government in Canada.
Any attempt by a province to violate these rights of public debate and the press were unconstitutional.
Since crimes are exclusively federal jurisdiction in Canada, this legislation was unconstitutional on that ground.
Four months after the Supreme Court of Canada decision, a panel of five English Law Lords unanimously dismissed the Alberta government’s appeal, mostly on the ground that, because of the Supreme Court of Canada decision a few months earlier, the Alberta government had repealed most of the primary economic reform legislation.
The English Lords, however, added that they had no doubt as to the correctness of the Supreme Court of Canada decision.
The citation reads: “for its editorial leadership in defense of the freedom of the press in the province of Alberta, Canada.”
The Implied Bill of Rights doctrine demonstrated how judges in Canada could, and would, fashion human rights such as the freedoms of speech and the press.
Interestingly, in a 2010 case, R. v. National Post, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that newspapers’ confidential sources may be protected today (Barr, John J., The Dynasty: The Rise and Fall of Social Credit in Alberta.
The Prime Minister of Canada.
1938 in Canada: 18th Canadian Parliament, Accurate News and Information ACT, Bloody Sunday, 1938 International Lawn Tennis Challenge Perfect Paperback – Sep 15 2010
It, and its successor party, the New Democratic Party, would become a major source of policies that would change the fabric of Canada.
TITLE:	Alberta Social Credit Party Fonds
CREATOR:	Alberta Social Credit Party
A high school principal and radio evangelist in Alberta, William Aberhart, introduced Social Credit to the listeners of his radio program, "Back to Bible Hour".
By early 1935, the movement had spread throughout Alberta, and Aberhart became president of the newly formed Social Credit League.
The ruling United Farmers' of Alberta (UFA) lost all of their seats while the Social Credit League gained the majority with fifty-six seats.
While in power, the Social Credit government attempted to effect new laws such as the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, and the Bank Taxation Act.
However, the Lieutenant-Governor and the Federal Government disallowed almost all of the reforms excepting the establishment of Credit Houses, now Alberta Treasury Branches.
After failure to enact the promised reforms, public opinion turned on the Party and newspapers began to criticize the government.
In response, the Social Credit government passed the Accurate News and Information Act in an effort to censor the media.
He turned the bill over to the Supreme Court of Canada for comment and the court ruled the bill unconstitutional under the British North America Act.
Despite the criticism lobbed at the party, Alberta re-elected the Social Credit Party in 1940.
During Manning's tenure as Premier, he developed Alberta's oil and gas industry.
He facilitated American investments in the industry, and he established the Alberta Gas Truck Line.
He also promoted the construction of the Trans-Canada Pipeline during the late 1950s.
The Alberta Social Credit Party also maintained a women's auxiliary that worked in support of the Party.
The Social Credit Party remains a registered political party in Canada.
According to the by-laws of the Party, the purpose of the Party includes promoting the election of enough candidates of the Alberta Social Credit Party to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta to form a government.
Objectives of the party include study and extending the knowledge of the principles of the Alberta Social Credit Party and their application in Alberta; to establish responsible and effective democratic government in Alberta; to oppose and expose any attempts to weaken the democratic sovereignty and the democratic institutions of the people by the means of increased centralization of power; to oppose any attempt to spread or implant the seeds of racial discrimination, class hatred or religious intolerance among the citizens of Alberta; to obtain the economic security which the vast resources of Alberta can provide for its citizens; to make poverty and privation totally unnecessary; to secure freedom from oppressive debt and taxation; to influence the provincial economy through the Alberta Treasury Branch and other provincial financial institutions through such measures as low interest loans; to provide the people of Alberta with an effective organization for obtaining information on matters essential to their welfare and for taking action to assert their democratic will; and to foster, advance and promote the attainment of a humanitarian society within the framework of a realistic and responsible free economy.
CUSTODIAL HISTORY:	The Alberta Social Credit Party and the Social Credit Women's Auxiliary deposited the following accessions to the Provincial Archives of Alberta on a permanent loan basis: PR1965.0129, PR1970.0012, PR1979.0087, PR1982.0153, PR1983.0353, PR1993.0619, PR1993.0227, PR1993.0066, PR1994.0136, PR1999.0551.
Mr. Thorn was Secretary-Treasurer of the Alberta Social Credit League, Wetaskiwin Constituency.
In 1966, the Glenbow Museum and Archives donated material comprising PR1966.0209 to the Provincial Archives of Alberta.
In 1971, employees of the Glenbow Museum and Archives donated material comprising PR1971.0166 to the Provincial Archives of Alberta.
Mr. Frank L. Thorn donated PR1972.0232 the Provincial Archives of Alberta in 1972.
In 1992, Bill Logan donated material comprising PR1992.0135 to the Provincial Archives of Alberta.
SCOPE AND CONTENT:	The fonds consists of records documenting the activities of the Alberta Social Credit Party dating from 1939 to 1993 including reports, resolutions, conventions, manuals, policies and principles, financial statements, correspondence, guidelines, certificates, payrolls, ledgers, accounts, biographies of members, expenses, campaign forms, electoral maps, photographs of candidates, newsletters, publications, minutes, election pamphlets, newsletters, party information and advertising, clippings, songs and poems, handbook letters, appeal letters, constituency reports, opinion surveys, demographic studies, election statistics, provincial election returns, summary of proceedings of conferences, certificates, guidelines for nomination and potential candidates, campaign manuals, mailing lists, lists of federal and provincial constituencies, lists of electors, platforms, campaign literature, speeches, lists of candidates, pamphlets, name tags, bulletins, attendance registers.
In addition, the fonds includes records documenting the Alberta Social Credit Women's Auxiliaries including convention proceedings, correspondence, financial lists, financial statements, guest books, resolutions, bulletins, scrapbooks, directories, newsletters, minutes from various councils including the following auxiliaries: Edmonton, Calgary, Strathcona South, Strathcona East, Prairie Rose, Drumheller, Garneau, Mill Creek, Inglewood, and Excelsior.
The records also document the Democrative Monetary Reform Organization and the Alberta Social Credit League Board including circulars, resolutions, speech notes, financial statements and convention reports.
ASSOCIATED MATERIAL:	Please see the Alberta Social Credit League Wetaskiwin Constituency fonds at City of Wetaskiwin Archives.
RELATED RECORDS:	The Provincial Archives of Alberta holds many records related to the Alberta Social Credit Party including the William Aberhart fonds, the Harry Strom fonds, the Ernest Manning fonds and the Cornelia Wood fonds.
GENERAL NOTE:	Information for the administrative history/biographical sketch sourced from the fonds and: Alberta Social Credit Party, http://www.socialcredit.com/ (Accessed July 14, 2008) The Canadian Encyclopedia, http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&Params=A1ARTA0007518 (Accessed July 14, 2008) Alberta Heritage, http://www.abheritage.ca/abpolitics/events/party_social.html (Accessed July 14, 2008) Great Alberta Law Cases, http://www.albertasource.ca/lawcases/criminal/bankerstoadies/bankerstoadies_setting.htm (Accessed July 15, 2008) A photograph of the Members of the Legislative Assembly dating from the 1935 may be found under the no.
A3580 in the Photographic Reference Section of the Provincial Archives of Alberta.
SUBJECT HEADINGS:	Alberta -- Politics and government
Alberta Social Credit Party
The Honourable John C. Bowen, 1937-50
The Honourable John C. Bowen was the only clergyman who ever held the position of Lieutenant Governor of Alberta.
He also served longer than any of Alberta's Lieutenant Governors.
As well as attending public schools in Ontario, John C. Bowen studied at Brandon College, in Brandon, Manitoba, and McMaster University, in Hamilton, Ontario.
John C. Bowen and his wife had two daughters: Margaret Gwendolyn and Emma Ruth.
John C. Bowen's first experience in western Canada was as a student harvester in southern Alberta.
Later, when he completed his theological training, he held Baptist church pastorates in Dauphin, Manitoba; Broadway Baptist Church in Winnipeg, Manitoba; and Strathcona Baptist Church in Edmonton, Alberta; before becoming Secretary of the Board of Education, Baptist Union of Western Canada.
Returning to Edmonton in 1912, he went into the life insurance business with Mutual Life Assurance of Canada.
In response to the Great War, John C. Bowen went overseas from Edmonton in October, 1915, as Chaplain of the Sixty-third Battalion of the Canadian Expeditionary Force.
John C. Bowen was a member of the Edmonton Exhibition Board (1921-26) and was also Chairman of Edmonton's Board of Public Welfare and Board of Health.
In 1921, John C. Bowen was elected as one of the five candidates for the multi-Member Edmonton electoral district of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta.
On the advice of Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, John C. Bowen was appointed Lieutenant Governor of Alberta effective March 23, 1937.
This appointment was made by Lord Tweedsmuir, Governor General of Canada.
During his term as Lieutenant Governor, a great deal of John C. Bowen's work related to the conduct of World War II.
He helped promote the sale of war bonds, visited military units posted in Alberta, and liaised with the United States Army in Edmonton and in Whitehorse, Yukon Territory, during the construction of the Alaska Highway.
As well, he became entangled in a serious constitutional dispute when he refused to give Royal Assent to three bills passed by the Alberta Legislature in 1937.
The third, the Accurate News and Information Act, would have forced newspapers to print government rebuttals to stories the Cabinet deemed misleading.
All three bills were later declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Canada and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council at Westminster, England.
John C. Bowen was reappointed Lieutenant Governor for a second term and continued to serve in that capacity until his successor was appointed effective February 1, 1950.
John C. Bowen was a member of the Northern Alberta Pioneers and Descendants Association and served on the Board of Brandon College, which later became Brandon University.
He was presented with the United States Medal of Freedom with Silver Palm for meritorious services performed for the United States Armed Forces stationed in western Canada from 1943 to 1945 and he received an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree (1939) from the University of Alberta.
John C. Bowen died on January 2, 1957, at Edmonton, Alberta, and was buried in the Edmonton Cemetery.
Alberta's Lieutenant Governors and Royal Assent
When William Aberhart became the Premier of Alberta in 1935, his Social Credit Party government began a series of measures to deal with the effects of the Great Depression on the Alberta economy.
The response by two Alberta Lieutenant Governors to the government’s proposed bills helped establish Canadian precedents on the authority of Vice Regal offices in protecting civil liberties and ensuring the constitutionality of legislation.
He suggested three options to the Premier: delay the bill until the next session, send the legislation for review to the Supreme Court of Alberta or do nothing in which case the Lieutenant Governor would likely withhold Royal Assent of the bill.
The government chose to send the bill for review by the Supreme Court of Alberta and that court ruled that the proposed Act was unconstitutional.
The Issue continued under the tenure of Lieutenant Governor John C. Bowen, who took office in March 1937.
That spring, the Aberhart government introduced three bills to further its economic plans: the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, the Bank Employees Civil Rights Act and the Judicature Act Amendment Act.
The government re-introduced the bills in the fall 1937 session of the Legislative Assembly.
Although the bills had been modified, they included new unconstitutional provisions.
The new bills in question were the Bank Taxation Act, an Act to Amend the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act and the Act to Ensure the Publication of Accurate News and information.
The Accurate News Act included unconstitutional elements, such as a requirement for Alberta newspapers to publish “correction or amplification” of any story as requested by the Chair of the Alberta Social Credit Party.
On October 6, 1937, Lieutenant Governor Bowen announced that he was reserving Royal Assent on the three bills until they could be sent to the Supreme Court for review.
The following spring, the Supreme Court of Canada determined that all three acts were beyond the legislative authority of the province.
On March 4, 1938, the Supreme Court of Canada supported Lieutenant Governor Bowen’s actions and ruled that the powers of reservation and disallowance of vice-regal offices were “subject to no limitation or restriction.”
While the government of day had no way to counter the powers of reservation held by the Lieutenant Governor, it did control services provided to Government House, which served as official residence to Alberta’s first six vice-regal representatives.
In the spring of 1938, the Committee of Supply of the Alberta Legislature eliminated all funds for the upkeep of Government House and Lieutenant Governor Bowen was informed that he and his family would have to vacate the residence by May 3.
Alberta’s Lieutenant Governors have never returned to live in Government House.
However, the contributions Honourable John Bowen offered as a guardian of Canada’s constitutional principles are shared with visitors to the house and stand as an important chapter in the nation’s vice-regal history.
In 1935, Alberta elected the first Social Credit government in the world and a man by the name of William Aberhart, would be named premier of Alberta.
Upon his death, his lieutenant, Ernest Manning took the reins and ran Alberta for several decades.
Later Ernest's son Preston Manning would found the Reform Party and his lieutenant Stephen Harper would head up the same party under the Alliance banner and later the (Reform) Conservative Party of Canada.
Without crudely borrowing the name of Germany's "Ministry of Propaganda & Public Enlightenment," Premier Aberhart announced that Alberta Government news will hereafter be "dished out in platters" by a bureau with exclusive monopoly of statements from the Premier & Cabinet so that ''there will be no more scoops.
Alberta
This prompted the Alberta legislature to pass what was called The Accurate News and Information Act, which essentially was an attempt to muzzle the press, and according to Time Magazine: The .
bill would force Alberta newspapers to give as much as one full page to presentation of the Government's views verbatim at any time upon demand.
The act also required newspapers to print, at the instruction of the chair of the Social Credit Board, any statement "which has for its object the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the Government of the Province."
The Supreme Court eventually overturned this measure as being unconstitutional.
They fought William Aberhart tooth and nail and they won.
And ninety-five other papers, including the Calgary Albertan, Edmonton Bulletin, Calgary Herald, Lethbridge Herald, and Medicine Hat News, were presented with engraved certificates.
In 2006, roughly seven decades after the founder of this movement, William Aberhart, attempts to strangle the media; his successor, Stephen Harper also makes Time Magazine, as they report that:
How many Canadian newspapers will win certificates for standing up to this totalitarian regime?
But not an apology from the PMO, but an apology from Canada's press who allowed this to happen.
Alberta Press Act Reference (1938)
Alberta Press Act Reference (1938), also called Reference Re Alberta Legislation, concerned 4 Alberta statutes, one of which, the Accurate News and Information Act, would have compelled each newspaper in the province, when called upon to do so by a government official, to publish the government's rebuttal of criticism that had appeared in the newspaper.
Alberta Press Act Reference (1938), also called Reference Re Alberta Legislation, concerned 4 Alberta statutes, one of which, the Accurate News and Information Act, would have compelled each newspaper in the province, when called upon to do so by a government official, to publish the government's rebuttal of criticism that had appeared in the newspaper.
The Supreme Court of Canada judged that the bill was ultra vires the jurisdiction of the provincial legislature.
Five of the six judges gave, as the primary reason for their decision, the reason that the Accurate News and Information Act was ancillary to the Alberta Social Credit Act, which had been declared invalid by the court in this reference.
Two judges, however, added that free political discussion was too important to Canada as a whole to be treated as a local and private matter, and one other judge argued that legislation affecting freedom of the press in discussing public affairs was within the criminal law power of Parliament.
Canada’s first, and perhaps most famous, legal case on free speech dates from 1937.
In that year, the Alberta Social Credit government passed the Act to Ensure the Publication of Accurate News and Information, as part of a major legislative package to regulate the provincial economy.
In effect, the law would have required newspapers to disclose their sources, name their writers, and print government-supplied “corrections” of any critical coverage.
In 1939, the Supreme Court of Canada found that the law was ultra vires (beyond) the powers of the Alberta government, ruling for the first time that provinces could not unilaterally restrict fundamental freedoms.
Justice Lawrence Cannon accused the provincial government of imposing a doctrine that “must become, for the people of Alberta, a sort of religious dogma of which a free and uncontrolled discussion is not permissible.”
[Alberta Press Bill, 1938] Writing one of Canada’s most cited legal decisions, Justice Lyman Duff argued that “even within its legal limits, it [public discussion] is liable to abuse and grave abuse, and such abuse is constantly exemplified before our eyes; but it is axiomatic that the practice of this right to free public discussion of public affairs, notwithstanding its incidental mischiefs, is the breath of life for parliamentary institutions.”
Such barefaced attempts to censor speech, however, have been rare in Canada.
In 1954, the Catholic Women’s League, women’s farm unions, and the University Women’s Club, in conjunction with the Alberta government, established an Advisory Board on Objectionable Publications.
Quebec was the only other province in Canada to possess a censor board for literature, and like its Alberta and Ontario counterparts, it was operated by private citizens who advised dealers with the support of the provincial government.
In 1962, the Supreme Court of Canada (Brodie, Dansky, Rubin v.
“the average serious film circulating in Canada would be classified Restricted with a few minor incisions in Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia.
In Alberta, it would be ‘chopped to pieces’ or banned.
Alberta’s censors insisted in 1959 on eliminating the word “floozie” from a movie titled Shadows, and they banned Marlon Brando’s 1953 classic The Wild One for being a “revolting, sadistic story of degeneration.”
Alberta was the only province to ban Andy Warhol’s Frankenstein in 1974.
1985: Luscher v. Deputy Minister, Revenue Canada, Customs and Excise, [1985] 1 F.C. 85
Is Bill No. 1 entitled "An Act Respecting the Taxa­tion of Banks" or any of the provisions thereof and in what particular or particulars or to what extent intra vires of the legislature of the province of Alberta?
This bill provides that every bank which transacts busi­ness in the province of Alberta shall annually pay to His Majesty for the use of the province, in addition to any tax payable pursuant to any other Act, the following taxes, namely:
That the tendency of the tax is that it shall be passed on and is in reality an attempt to impose a tax on the paid up capital and reserves and profits throughout Canada and abroad and, therefore, is not "direct taxation within the province" ;
Can it be denied that, under existing, conditions in Canada since the war, the reduction of the salaries of Dominion employees in proportion to the needs of the provinces or municipalities, which in some cases are very great and are increasing alarmingly, would, if added to
If such power is used unwisely or extravagantly, against the best interest of the whole of Canada, the power of disallowance by the Governor-General in Council, or, as in this case, that of reservation by the Lieutenant-Governor, acting, presumably, according to his instructions from the central government, are the only means or safety valves provided in our " carefully balanced constitution," to see that " no one of the parts can pass laws for itself except under the control of the whole acting through the Governor-General."
It must be borne in mind, however, that in the two cases last cited the Attorney-General of Canada did not appear before the Court, did not interfere in any way to show that, in the opinion of the Federal Government, the interests of the Dominion as a body politic were at stake when the emoluments fixed by Parliament for the Judiciary or the civil service were reduced by provincial taxation.
For my part, although I always believed that the efficiency of essentially federal services, like banking, cannot be impaired by provincial legislation, I, at first, felt myself bound by these concurrent and recent decisions to say that the Alberta Legislature is competent to enact a statute in the terms of this bill.
But, after perusing with great advantage the reasons of my Lord the Chief Justice, I reach the conclusion that the bill, despite its form, does not seek to raise revenue for provincial purposes but, in its true character, aims, by erecting a prohibitive barrier, to prevent the banks from conducting their legitimate business in Alberta.
Such purpose and effect must be declared ultra vires of the legislature of Alberta, which cannot use its special powers as an indirect means of destroying powers given by the Parliament of Canada.
Is Bill No. 8, entitled An Act to Amend and Consolidate the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, or any of the provisions thereof and in what particular or particulars or to what extent intra vires of the legislature of the province of Alberta?
This Bill, if it became law, would constitute an invasion by the province of Alberta of the Dominion's exclusive power, of regulating banks and banking.
Is Bill No. 9, entitled An Act to ensure the Publication of Accur­ate News and Information, or any of the provisions thereof and in what particular or particulars or to what extent intra vires of the legislature of the province of Alberta?
The order-in-council represents that it has been and is the avowed object of the present government of the province of Alberta to inaugurate in the said province a " new economic order " upon the principles or plan of the theory known as the "Social Credit"; and that the said government has since secured the enactment of several statutes more or less related to the policy of effectuating the said object.
expedient and in the public interest that the newspapers published in the Province should furnish to the people of the Province statements made by the authority of the Government of the Province as to the true and exact objects of the policy of the Government and as to the hindrances to or difficulties in.
Section 3 provides that any proprietor, editor, publisher or manager of any newspaper published in the province shall, when required to do so by the Chairman of the Board constituted by section 3 of the Alberta Social Credit Act, publish in that newspaper any statement furnished by the Chairman which has for its object the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the government of the province published by that newspaper within the next preceding thirty-one days.
3, 1937, second session, of The Alberta Social Credit Amendment Act is
and the objectives in which the people of Alberta must have a firm and unshaken belief are the monetization of credit and the creation of a provincial medium of exchange instead of money to be used for the purposes of distributing to Albertans loans without interest, per capita dividends and discount rates to purchase goods from retailers.
This free distribution would be based on the unused capacity of the industries and people of the province of Alberta
The purchasing power would equal or absorb this hitherto unused capacity to produce goods and services by the issue of Treasury Credit certificates against a Credit Fund or Provincial credit account established by the Commission each year representing the monetary value of this "unused capacity" —which is also called " Alberta credit."
It is, therefore, essential to control the sources of information of the people of Alberta, in order to keep them immune from any vacillation in their absolute faith in the plan of the government.
The Social Credit doctrine must become, for the people of Alberta, a sort of religious dogma of which a free and uncontrolled discussion is not permissible.
The bill does not regulate the relations of the newspapers' owners with private individual members of the public, but deals exclusively with expressions of opinion by the newspapers concerning government policies and activities.
The pith and substance of the bill is to regulate the press of Alberta from the viewpoint of public policy by preventing the public from being misled or deceived as to any policy or activity of the Social Credit Government and by reducing any opposition to silence or bring upon it ridicule and public contempt.
I agree with the submission of the Attorney-General for Canada that this bill deals with the regulation of the press of Alberta, not from the viewpoint of private wrongs or civil injuries resulting from any alleged infringement or privation of civil rights which belong to individuals, con­sidered as individuals, but from the viewpoint of public wrongs or crimes, i.e., involving a violation of the public rights and duties to the whole community, considered as a community, in its social aggregate capacity.
Do the provisions of this bill, as alleged by the Attorney-General for Canada, invade the domain of criminal
(b) to point out errors, or defects in the government or constitu­tion of the United Kingdom, or of any part of it, or of Canada or any province thereof, or in either House of Parliament of the United Kingdom or of Canada, or in any legislature, or in the administration of justice; or to excite His Majesty's subjects to attempt to procure, by lawful means, the alteration of any matter of state; or
Now, it seems to me that the Alberta legislature by this retrograde Bill is attempting to revive the old theory of the crime of seditious libel by enacting penalties, confiscation of space in newspapers and prohibitions for actions which, after due consideration by the Dominion Parliament, have been declared innocuous and which, therefore, every citizen of Canada can do lawfully and without hindrance or fear of punishment.
133 (a) to the Alberta newspaper pub­lishers.
Every inhabitant in Alberta is also a citizen of the Dominion.
They have a tendency to nullify the political rights of the inhabitants of Alberta, as citizens of Canada, and cannot be considered as dealing with matters purely private and local in that province.
No province has the power to reduce in that province the political rights of its citizens as compared with those enjoyed by the citizens of other provinces of Canada.
Moreover, citizens outside the province of Alberta have a vital interest in having full information and comment, favourable and unfavourable, regarding the policy of the Alberta government and concerning events in that province which would, in the ordinary course, be the subject of Alberta newspapers' news items and articles.
