Execution by elephant

Crushing by Elephant: This was a relatively common form of capital punishment in South and South-east Asia, although theCrushing by Elephant practice did spread to countries such as Rome and the Carthage Empire.
Many of the elephants used were trained to either crush the convict quickly, or to torture them over a longer period of time, and were used as a symbol of wealth and power.
Damnatio ad bestias: Latin for ‘condemnation to beasts’, this was a form of capital punishment in which convicts were devoured by large animals, predominantly lions.
Stoning is an ancient method of capital punishment, which involved a group of people throwing stones at the condemned until death occurred.
As of September 2010, stoning is used as a form of capital punishment in numerous countries, including Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Iran, and Yemen.
In Rome, deserters or enemies of the state were burned alive, and the list of crimes grew as Constantine the Great came into power.
Death by decapitation has been used around the world as a form of capital punishment for centuries.
The actual term ‘capital punishment’ derives from the Latin ‘Caput’, meaning ‘head’, and referred to the punishment of crimes by beheading.
In England, The convicts of lower classes would be subjected to execution via the gallows or burning at the stake, whilst the noblemen and royalty were awarded the beheading.
This form of execution is also known as fusillading, and has been used as a standard form of capital punishment for centuries, particularly times of war, or in the military.
The prisoner is blindfold or hooded, and restrained and either told to stand still or sitting.
Execution by Elephant  in India.
Execution by elephant
First of all, this extraordinary passage from the work of Louis Rousselet, India and its Native Princes (1882).
In chapter ten of India – first published as L’Inde des Rajahs: Voyage Dans l’Inde Centrale in 1875 – Rousselet describes his visit to Baroda (Vadodara) in north-western India.
Then his head is placed upon a stone, and the elephant executioner crushes it beneath his enormous foot.
(i) As here a specially-trained elephant executioner was sent in to trample or crush the condemned.
In some sub-continental states elephant executioners were expected to prolong the suffering of the prisoner by throwing him in the air or by crushing the limbs before going in for the kill.
(ii) In medieval India, under the sultans, elephants, instead, employed blades to kill the condemned.
Execution by elephant was once common in Asia, particularly in India.
Asian Elephants were used to crush, dismember, or torture captives in public executions.
The animals were trained specifically for these tasks, being able to either immediately stomp the life out of a victim or to torture them slowly over a prolonged period.
The use of the elephant apparently signified a ruler’s absolute power given his ability to ‘control wild animals’.
The kings of Siam trained their elephants to roll the convicted person "about the ground rather slowly so that he is not badly hurt".
I wonder if the lovely Indian Restaurant in Bradford is named after him?
“During the native dynasty it was the practice to train elephants to put criminals to death by trampling upon them, the creatures being taught to prolong the agony of the wretched sufferers by crushing the limbs, avoiding the vital parts.
This he continued to do for some minutes; then, as if satisfied that the bones must be crushed, the elephant raised his trunk high upon his head and stood motionless; the chief then ordered him to ‘complete his work,’ and the creature immediately placed one foot, as if upon the man’s abdomen, and the other upon his head, apparently using his entire strength to crush and terminate the wretch’s misery”
During an expedition to central India in 1868, Louis Rousselet described the execution of a criminal by an elephant.
A sketch was made of the execution showing the condemned being forced to place his head upon a pedestal, and then being held there while an elephant crushed his head underfoot.
The growing power of the British Empire led to the decline and eventual end of elephant executions in India.
Writing in 1914, Eleanor Maddock noted that in Kashmir, since the arrival of Europeans, "many of the old customs are disappearing – and one of these is the dreadful custom of the execution of criminals by an elephant trained for the purpose and which was known by the hereditary name of ‘Gunga Rao’."
Execution by elephant was a cruel method of capital punishment commonly used in South and Southeast Asia, and particularly in India.
Asian elephants were used to torture captives in public executions as here shown.
Execution by Elephant: Ancient Capital Punishment in India
Although different countries have had equally gruesome methods of inflicting the highest form of punishment, India had one of the most brutal methods of criminal torture: execution by elephant.
Designed to demonstrate to the people that even the awe-inspiring power of nature was under the iron grip of the emperor, execution by elephant — or gunga rao, as it’s called in India — became a choice method for capital punishment during the Middle Ages and continued well into the 19th century.
Although the execution method was thought to have originated in ancient Rome, the practice of stomping the punished via elephant became popular in both western and Southeast Asia and in India.
However, this method of execution declined as the British Empire grew in power.
As for the elephants, they were often trained to “instantly crush [the offender] to atoms … but if it was desired to torture him, the elephant would break his limbs successively, as men are broken on the wheel,” observed Robert Kerr, a writer from the 19th century.
One of the oldest forms of torture and execution, snake pits were a very common form of capital punishment.
Death by burning has been used as a form of capital punishment for centuries, often associated with crimes such as treason and witchcraft.
In South and Southeast Asia, the Elephant has been a method of capital punishment for thousands of years.
The animals were trained to execute two ways.
Usually employed by royalty, these elephant assassins only heightened the fear of royalty to the common people, proving that they even had the ability to control wild animals.
This form of Chinese capital punishment is a relatively easy concept to grasp.
Death by elephant was a common method of execution in Southern and Southeastern Asia, although Western powers like Rome and Carthage occasionally employed it as well.
The trained elephant would either crush your head, bringing about instantaneous death, or crush all of your limbs, one by one.
Other cultures used the elephant’s great strength and power in battle, or for huge construction projects.
Execution by elephant was a form of capital punishment and a weapon of war for certain societies of the past.
“Then Perdiccas, seeing them paralyzed and in his power, separated from the rest about thirty who had followed Meleager when he rushed forth from the first assembly which was held after the death of Alexander, and in the sight of the whole army cast them before the elephants.
Nevertheless, this was not a common method of execution in the West.
On the other hand, execution by elephant was more frequently used in South and Southeast Asia, especially in India.
This form of capital punishment is known also as gunga rao , and has been used since the Middle Ages.
The popularity of this mode of execution continued into the 19th century, and it was only with the increasing presence of the British in India that the popularity of this brutal penalty went into decline.
The most common way that the execution by elephant was carried out was for the beasts to crush its victim to death with brute force.
As an example, an elephant could be commanded to break a criminal’s limbs before ending his suffering by crushing his skull.
According to the Frenchman, the elephants were trained to slice criminals to pieces with “pointed blades fitted to their tusks”.
Apart from India, execution by elephant was also practiced in some other Asian countries.
Like India, it was the elephant’s intelligence and brute force that were exploited to execute criminals.
In the former Kingdom of Siam (now Thailand), elephants were trained to toss their victims into the air before crushing them to death.
In the Kingdom of Cochinchina (southern Vietnam), on the other hand, criminals were tied to a stake, whilst an elephant would charge into them, and crush them to death.
Indian Execution Methods With Elephants 1 - Crushing Under Elephant Animation
At history of India, elephants used by nearly everything like now.
It was mostly the head crushing under an elephants feet.
Crimital crushed under 6 tons of a trained giant animal.
If they are crushed heads why not entire bodies.
