Regents of the University of California v. Bakke

When the Supreme Court first ruled on affirmative action
The fractured court came to a mixed decision on the issue of racial preferences in university admissions, laying the groundwork for educational standards that still exist today.
Thus, colleges like the University of California, Davis School of Medicine adopted policies of racial favoritism, policies designed to compensate for unfair disadvantages.
Compared to the special admittees of UC Davis’s affirmative action program, he beat every student in every metric in both of his application classes.
Bakke, exasperated by the rejections, filed suit, contending that the University of California violated the equal protection guarantee of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act.
Affirming the lower court, Powell and four of his colleagues determined that specific racial quotas in university admissions are unconstitutional.
In Powell’s words, “The fatal flaw in … [UC’s] preferential program is its disregard of individual rights as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.”
Thus, the Court struck down racial quotas and ordered Bakke admitted.
But Bakke remains fundamental precedent on affirmative action.
After his second rejection, respondent filed this action in state court for mandatory, injunctive, and declaratory relief to compel his admission to Davis, alleging that the special admissions program operated to exclude him on the basis of his race in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, a provision of the California Constitution, and 601 of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which provides, inter alia, that no person shall on the ground of race or color be excluded from participating in any program receiving federal financial assistance.
The Superior Court of California sustained respondent's challenge, holding that petitioner's program violated the California Constitution, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq., and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
He alleged that the Medical School's special admissions program operated to exclude him from the [438 U.S. 265, 278]   school on the basis of his race, in violation of his rights under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, 9 Art.
Without passing on the state constitutional or the federal statutory grounds cited in the trial court's judgment, the California court held [438 U.S. 265, 280]   that the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment required that "no applicant may be rejected because of his race, in favor of another who is less qualified, as measured by standards applied without regard to race."
Petitioner does not deny that decisions based on race or ethnic origin by faculties and administrations of state universities are reviewable under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Respondent, on the other hand, contends that the California court correctly rejected the notion that the degree of judicial scrutiny accorded a particular racial or ethnic classification hinges upon membership in a discrete and insular minority and duly recognized that the "rights established [by the Fourteenth Amendment] are personal rights."
The guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment extend to all persons.
It is settled beyond question that the "rights created by the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment are, by its terms, guaranteed to the individual.
The Court's initial view of the Fourteenth Amendment was that its "one pervading purpose" was "the freedom of the slave race, the security and firm establishment of that freedom, and the protection of the newly-made freeman and citizen from the oppressions of those who had formerly exercised dominion over him."
29 It was relegated to decades of relative desuetude while the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, after a short germinal period, flourished as a cornerstone in the Court's defense of property and liberty of contract.
In that cause, the Fourteenth Amendment's "one pervading purpose" was displaced.
By that time it was no longer possible to peg the guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment to the struggle for equality of one racial minority.
Although many of the Framers of the Fourteenth Amendment conceived of its primary function as bridging the vast distance between members of the Negro race and the white "majority," Slaughter-House Cases, supra, the Amendment itself was framed in universal terms, without reference to color, ethnic origin, or condition of prior servitude.
Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1056 (1866) (remarks of Rep. Niblack); id., at 2891-2892 (remarks of Sen. Conness); id., 40th Cong., 2d Sess., 883 (1868) (remarks of Sen. Howe) (Fourteenth Amendment "protect[s] classes from class legislation").
Because the landmark decisions in this area arose in response to the continued exclusion of Negroes from the mainstream of American society, they could be characterized as involving discrimination by the "majority" white race against the Negro minority.
35 "The Fourteenth Amendment is not directed solely against discrimination due to a `two-class theory' - that is, based upon differences between `white' and Negro."
Once the artificial line of a "two-class theory" of the Fourteenth Amendment is put aside, the difficulties entailed in varying the level of judicial review according to a perceived "preferred" status of a particular racial or ethnic minority are intractable.
See DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312, 343 (1974) (Douglas, J., dissenting).
Respondent urges - and the courts below have held - that petitioner's dual admissions program is a racial classification that impermissibly infringes his rights under the Fourteenth Amendment.
His qualifications would have been weighed fairly and competitively, and he would have no basis to complain of unequal treatment under the Fourteenth Amendment.
The fatal flaw in petitioner's preferential program is its disregard of individual rights as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.
For this reason, that portion of the California court's judgment holding petitioner's special admissions program invalid under the Fourteenth Amendment must be affirmed.
DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312, 337 -340 (1974) (dissenting opinion) (footnotes omitted).
Furthermore, we are not here presented with an occasion to review legislation by Congress pursuant to its powers under 2 of the Thirteenth Amendment and 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment to remedy the effects of prior discrimination.
We agree with MR. JUSTICE POWELL that, as applied to the case before us, Title VI goes no further in prohibiting the use of race than the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment itself.
The Fourteenth Amendment, the embodiment in the Constitution of our abiding belief in human equality, has been the law of our land for only slightly more than half its 200 years.
Yet we cannot - and, as we shall demonstrate, need not under our Constitution or Title VI, which merely extends the constraints of the Fourteenth Amendment to private parties who receive federal funds - let color blindness become myopia which masks the reality that many "created equal" have been treated within our lifetimes as inferior both by the law and by their fellow citizens.
In our view, Title VI prohibits only those uses of racial criteria that would violate the Fourteenth Amendment if employed by a State or its agencies; it does not bar the preferential treatment of racial minorities as a means of remedying past societal discrimination to the extent that such action is consistent with the Fourteenth Amendment.
Although Senator Humphrey realized that Title VI reached conduct which, because of insufficient governmental action, might be beyond the reach of the Constitution, it was clear to him that the substantive standard imposed by the statute was that of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.
It was aware that there were many federally funded programs and institutions which discriminated against minorities in a manner inconsistent with the standards of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments but whose activities might not involve sufficient state or federal action so as to be in violation of these Amendments.
Many questions, such as whether the Fourteenth Amendment barred only de jure discrimination or in at least some circumstances reached de facto discrimination, had not yet received an authoritative judicial resolution.
In sum, Congress' equating of Title VI's prohibition with the commands of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, its refusal precisely to define that racial discrimination which it intended to prohibit, and its expectation that the statute would be administered in a flexible manner, compel the conclusion that Congress intended the meaning of the statute's prohibition to evolve with the interpretation of the commands of the Constitution.
"In administering a program regarding which the recipient has previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin, the recipient must take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination."
"Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a recipient in administering a program may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted [438 U.S. 265, 345]   in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, or national origin."
An explanatory regulation explicitly states that the affirmative action which 80.3 (b) (6) (ii) contemplates includes the use of racial preferences:
The amendment, as originally submitted by Representative Ashbrook, provided that "[n]one of the funds appropriated in this Act may be used to initiate, carry out or enforce any program of affirmative action or any other system of quotas or goals in regard to admission policies or employment practices which encourage or require any discrimination on the basis of race, creed, religion, sex or age."
In support of the measure, Representative Ashbrook argued that the 1964 Civil Rights Act never authorized the imposition of affirmative action and that this was a creation of the bureaucracy.
We turn, therefore, to our analysis of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
We conclude, therefore, that racial classifications are not per se invalid under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Thus, even if the concern for individualism is weighed by the political process, that weighing cannot waive the personal rights of individuals under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Thus, our review under the Fourteenth Amendment should be [438 U.S. 265, 362]   strict - not "`strict' in theory and fatal in fact," 36 because it is stigma that causes fatality - but strict and searching nonetheless.
Nor can our cases be distinguished on the ground that the entity using explicit racial classifications itself had violated 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment or an antidiscrimination regulation, for again race-conscious remedies have been approved where this is not the case.
Title VII was enacted pursuant to Congress' power under the Commerce Clause and 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.
To the extent that Congress acted under the Commerce Clause power, it was restricted in the use of race in governmental decisionmaking by the equal protection component of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment precisely to the same extent as are the States by 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment.
43 Therefore, to the extent that Title VII rests on the Commerce Clause power, our decisions such as Franks and [438 U.S. 265, 368]   Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324 (1977), implicitly recognize that the affirmative use of race is consistent with the equal protection component of the Fifth Amendment and therefore with the Fourteenth Amendment.
To the extent that Congress acted pursuant to 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, those cases impliedly recognize that Congress was empowered under that provision to accord preferential treatment to victims of past discrimination in order to overcome the effects of segregation, and we see no reason to conclude that the States cannot voluntarily accomplish under 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment what Congress under 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment validly may authorize or compel either the States or private persons to do.
Nothing whatever in the legislative history of either the Fourteenth Amendment or the Civil Rights Acts even remotely suggests that the States are foreclosed from furthering the fundamental purpose of equal opportunity to which the Amendment and those Acts are addressed.
"To use the Fourteenth Amendment as a sword against such State power would stultify that Amendment."
51 After enactment of the Fourteenth Amendment the States continued to deny Negroes equal educational opportunity, enforcing a strict policy of segregation that itself stamped Negroes as inferior, Brown I, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), that relegated minorities to inferior educational institutions, 52 and that denied them intercourse in the mainstream of professional life necessary to advancement.
That the Harvard approach does not also make public the extent of the preference and the precise workings of the system while the Davis program employs a specific, openly stated number, does not condemn the latter plan for purposes of Fourteenth Amendment adjudication.
Indeed, in this context there can be no doubt that the Fourteenth Amendment does command color blindness and forbids the use of racial criteria.
The former may well be contrary to the requirements of the Fourteenth Amendment (where state action is involved), while the latter presents very different constitutional considerations.
There is no more indication in the legislative history of Title VII than in that of Title VI that Congress desired to prohibit such affirmative action to the extent that it is permitted by the Constitution, yet judicial decisions as well as subsequent executive and congressional action clearly establish that Title VII does not forbid race-conscious remedial action.
, required federal contractors to take affirmative action to remedy the disproportionately low employment of racial minorities in the construction industry.
denied, 404 U.S. 854 (1971) (which also held, 442 F.2d, at 173, that race-conscious affirmative action was permissible under Title VI); Southern Illinois Builders Assn. v. Ogilvie, 471 F.2d 680 (CA7 1972).
[ Footnote 43 ] "Equal protection analysis in the Fifth Amendment area is the same as that under the Fourteenth Amendment."
[ Footnote 44 ] Railway Mail Assn. held that a state statute forbidding racial discrimination by certain labor organizations did not abridge the Association's due process rights secured by the Fourteenth Amendment because that result "would be a distortion of the policy manifested in that amendment, which was adopted to prevent state legislation designed to perpetuate discrimination on the basis of race or color."
That case thus established the principle that a State voluntarily could go beyond what the Fourteenth Amendment required in eliminating private racial discrimination.
Simkins held that under appropriate circumstances, the operation of a private hospital with "massive use of public funds and extensive state-federal sharing in the common plan" constituted "state action" for the purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment.
In Norwood v. Harrison, 413 U.S. 455 (1973), private schools that received state aid were held subject to the Fourteenth Amendment's ban on discrimination, but the Court's test required "tangible financial aid" with a "significant tendency to facilitate, reinforce, and support private discrimination."
According to the Court, the Fourteenth Amendment gave Congress the power to proscribe only discriminatory action by the State.
In upholding a Louisiana law that required railway companies to provide "equal but separate" accommodations for whites and Negroes, the Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment was not intended "to abolish distinctions based upon color, or to enforce social, as distinguished from political equality, or a commingling of the two races upon terms unsatisfactory to either."
I do not believe that the Fourteenth Amendment requires us to accept that fate.
It is plain that the Fourteenth Amendment was not intended to prohibit measures designed to remedy the effects of the [438 U.S. 265, 397]   Nation's past treatment of Negroes.
The Congress that passed the Fourteenth Amendment is the same Congress that passed the 1866 Freedmen's Bureau Act, an Act that provided many of its benefits only to Negroes.
Since the Congress that considered and rejected the objections to the 1866 Freedmen's Bureau Act concerning special relief to Negroes also proposed the Fourteenth Amendment, it is inconceivable that the Fourteenth Amendment was intended to prohibit all race-conscious relief measures.
These differences in the experience of the Negro make it difficult for me to accept that Negroes cannot be afforded greater protection under the Fourteenth Amendment where it is necessary to remedy the effects of past discrimination.
For example, we are told by the Attorney General of the United States that at least 27 federal agencies have adopted regulations requiring recipients of federal funds to take "`affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limiting participation . . . by persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.'"
After the Civil War our Government started several "affirmative action" programs.
I yield to no one in my earnest hope that the time will come when an "affirmative action" program is unnecessary and is, in truth, only a relic of the past.
I, of course, accept the propositions that (a) Fourteenth Amendment rights are personal; (b) racial and ethnic distinctions [438 U.S. 265, 405]   where they are stereotypes are inherently suspect and call for exacting judicial scrutiny; (c) academic freedom is a special concern of the First Amendment; and (d) the Fourteenth Amendment has expanded beyond its original 1868 concept and now is recognized to have reached a point where, as MR. JUSTICE POWELL states, ante, at 293, quoting from the Court's opinion in McDonald v. Santa Fe Trail Transp.
This enlargement does not mean for me, however, that the Fourteenth Amendment has broken away from its moorings and its original intended purposes.
And that, in a distinct sense, is what "affirmative action," in the face of proper facts, is all about.
If this conflicts with idealistic equality, that tension is original Fourteenth Amendment tension, constitutionally conceived and constitutionally imposed, and it is part of the Amendment's very nature until complete equality is achieved in the area.
2 Paragraph 3 declared that the University's special admissions program violated the Fourteenth Amendment, the State Constitution, and Title VI.
Only if petitioner should prevail on the statutory issue would it be necessary to decide whether the University's admissions program violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
No doubt, when this legislation was being debated, Congress was not directly concerned with the legality of "reverse discrimination" or "affirmative action" programs.
14 The opponents feared that the term "discrimination" [438 U.S. 265, 415]   would be read as mandating racial quotas and "racially balanced" colleges and universities, and they pressed for a specific definition of the term in order to avoid this possibility.
The statutory prohibition against discrimination in federally funded projects contained in 601 is more than a simple paraphrasing of what the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment would require.
Cross-defendant Allan Bakke have judgment against cross-complainant, the Regents of the University of California, declaring that the special admissions program at the University of California at Davis Medical School violates the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, Article 1, Section 21 of the California Constitution, and the Federal Civil Rights Act [42 U.S.C. 2000d];
[ Footnote 20 ] For example, private employers now under duties imposed by Title VII were wholly free from the restraints imposed by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments which are directed only to governmental action.
Where no discriminatory policy was in effect, HEW's example of permissible "affirmative action" refers to "special recruitment policies."
-(1978) was a landmark decision by the supreme court of u.s it upheld affirmative action allowing race to be one of several factors in college
-racial quotas are always unconstitutional
In Regents of University of California v. Bakke (1978), the Supreme Court ruled that a university's use of racial "quotas" in its admissions process was unconstitutional, but a school's use of "affirmative action" to accept more minority applicants was constitutional in some circumstances.
Bakke sued the University of California in a state court, alleging that the medical school's admission policy violated Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause.
California's use of racial quotas in this case, however, did not meet those requirements and violated the Constitution's Equal Protection Clause, which forbids a state from denying "to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws."
Regents of University of California v. Bakke established a pragmatic means of reconciling well-intentioned quota and affirmative action programs with the Constitution's zealous protection of equality.
In sum, racial quotas are always unconstitutional, but affirmative action programs may be constitutional if race is considered as one of many admission factors and used to remedy past findings of discrimination and to promote diversity.
In the 30 years since this ruling, public and private universities have crafted affirmative action programs consistent with Bakke's requirements.
In a related but separate decision -- Gratz v. Bollinger -- issued on the same day, however, the Court struck Michigan's undergraduate affirmative action program, which employed a points system to rate applicants and which awarded automatic points to minority applicants.
In Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, 570 U.S. ___ (2013), the Court upheld an affirmative action program, but emphasized that such programs must be reviewed under a standard of strict scrutiny to ensure that they are not used in place of non-race-based alternatives to achieve diversity.
Bakke decision, formally Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, ruling in which, on June 28, 1978, the U.S. Supreme Court declared affirmative action constitutional but invalidated the use of racial quotas.
The medical school at the University of California, Davis, as part of the university’s affirmative action program, had reserved 16 percent of its admission places for minority applicants.
Citing evidence that his grades and test scores surpassed those of many minority students who had been accepted for admission, Bakke charged that he had suffered unfair “reverse discrimination” on the basis of race, which he argued was contrary to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the equal protection clause of the U.S. Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment.
The Supreme Court, in a highly fractured ruling (six separate opinions were issued), agreed that the university’s use of strict racial quotas was unconstitutional and ordered that the medical school admit Bakke, but it also contended that race could be used as one criterion in the admissions decisions of institutions of higher education.
Although the ruling legalized the use of affirmative action, in subsequent decisions during the next several decades the court limited the scope of such programs, and several U.S. states prohibited affirmative action programs based on race.
The widely anticipated decisions came in cases involving two affirmative action programs in effect at the University of Michigan (Gratz v. Bollinger) and its law school (Grutter v. Bollinger).
Although the decision was limited to affirmative action in admissions at state universities, it is expected that the ruling will guide affirmative action policies at all institutions of higher learning, as well as for businesses and governments.
Since Bakke, the high court has not since revisited the issue of affirmative action in education, though it addressed affirmative action in government contracting in the 1995 case Adarand Constructors v. Pena
The Fifth Circuit in Hopwood v. Texas (1996) ruled that the affirmative action program at the University of Texas School of Law was unconstitutional, with the majority opinion suggesting that Bakke was no longer good law.
The Eleventh Circuit ruled in Johnson v. Board of Regents (2001) that the affirmative action program at the University of Georgia was not sufficiently narrowly tailored, and the Ninth Circuit ruled in Smith v. University of Washington Law School (2000) that educational diversity is a compelling governmental interest that meets the demands of strict scrutiny of race-conscious measures.
Having decided that the benefits of diversity justify the law school's affirmative action policies, the Court examined whether the means utilized by the law school were sufficiently narrowly tailored to achieve those benefits.
The Court expressed an expectation that the use of affirmative action will no longer be necessary in 25 years.
His dissent, which was joined in large part by Justice Scalia, centered on three themes: his objection to the declaration of student body diversity as a compelling state interest, his belief that affirmative action policies actually harm minorities, and his challenge to elite universities to abandon general admissions policies that knowingly produce minimal minority admissions.
Second, Justice Thomas attacked the Court's deference to the school's "academic decisions," instead contending that social science proves the harm to racial minorities from affirmative action.
In Texas, Florida and California, where lower courts or statewide referenda had invalidated race-conscious programs, university and state officials were faced with the issue of whether to reinstate affirmative action measures.
Reactions varied to the Court's stated "expectation" that affirmative action programs can safely be sunset in 25 years.
"By upholding the principle of affirmative action and the permissible use of race-conscious admissions policies of the University of Michigan's law school, the Supreme Court's decision today is a great victory for all Americans," declared Wade Henderson, executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, which filed an amicus brief in support of the university.
The Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF), which filed an amicus brief on behalf of major Latino organizations, applauded the U.S. Supreme Court's decision upholding the use of affirmative action at the University of Michigan.
The school reserved sixteen places in each entering class of one hundred for "qualified" minorities, as part of the university's affirmative action program.
Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr., agreed, casting the deciding vote ordering the medical school to admit Bakke.
However, in his concurring opinion, Powell argued that the use of racial quotas at the school violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Bakke had been accepted to several other medical schools, but he took issue with UC Davis when someone told him Davis used quotas for affirmative action.
The school reserved sixteen places in each entering class of one hundred for "qualified" minorities, as part of the university's affirmative action program, in an effort to redress longstanding, unfair minority exclusions from the medical profession.
Did the University of California violate the Fourteenth Amendment's equal protection clause, and the Civil Rights Act of 1964, by practicing an affirmative action policy that resulted in the repeated rejection of Bakke's application for admission to its medical school?
Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr., agreed, casting the deciding vote ordering the medical school to admit Bakke.
However, in his opinion, Powell argued that the rigid use of racial quotas as employed at the school violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
So, the Court managed to minimize white opposition to the goal of equality (by finding for Bakke) while extending gains for racial minorities through affirmative action.
At issue in Bakke:  Could the UC Davis School of Medicine use a “quota system” for admissions, for example, setting aside 16 out of 100 seats for minority students?
The case fractured the Court (and the overall issue of affirmative action has gotten no less divisive over the subsequent 36 years); the 9 justices issued a total of 6 opinions.
The four more liberal members of that court – William Brennan, Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, and Harry Blackmun – asserted that race may be taken into account when it acts not to demean or insult any racial group but to remedy disadvantages based on past racial prejudice; in other words, because affirmative action was motivated by “benign” and not hostile intentions it should be treated differently than traditional race based discrimination.
Justice Powell, writing just for himself, held that affirmative action programs in general were allowed as long as diversity was considered one factor among many other factors in admissions and that everyone had a chance to compete against each other.
In justifying his decision to allow some affirmative action programs Powell declared that the promotion of diversity in settings of higher education was a “compelling interest.”
Did the University of California violate the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection clause by holding an affirmative action policy that kept Allan Bakke out the medical school?
, a white applicant to the University of California, Davis Medical School, sued the University, alleging his denial of admission on racial grounds was a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
the affirmative action
The Respondent sued, alleging that the affirmative action program denied him equal protection of laws under the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution.
Affirmative action has been the subject of legal battles on the basis that it is reverse discrimination against Caucasians, but in most challenges to affirmative action the programs have been upheld.
The supreme court agreed that the university’s use of strict racial quotas was unconstitutional
The Bakke case resulted in the ruling that affirmative action -is- constitutional, but that it can not use a "quota system" based on race.
''The Supreme Court decision actually encouraged affirmative action goals by allowing the use of race and other determinants in academic achievement as acceptable admissions criteria,'' Dr. Robert G. Petersdorf, president of the Association of American Medical Colleges,
''Bakke was significant because it didn't put the brakes on affirmative action,'' said Rennard Strickland, dean of the Southern Illinois University Law School
The Supreme Court found for Bakke against the rigid use of racial quotas, but also established that race was a permissible criteria among several others.
Following passage of the 1964 and 1965 Civil Rights acts, President Johnson came to believe that it was not enough just to remove legal barriers confronting minorities; some form of affirmative action would be needed to help minorities overcome decades of prior discrimination.
On September 24, 1965, Johnson issued an executive order requiring federal contractors to take affirmative action to recruit, hire and promote more racial minorities; two years later, in another executive order, Johnson added women to the groups covered by previous antidiscrimination orders.
Affirmative action became one of the most divisive issues of the 1970s and 1980s, and yet the debate over affirmative action can also be seen as part of the process of democracy.
Put in starkest terms, proponents of affirmative action argue that because of prior discrimination in education and employment, women and minorities are handicapped when they apply to good schools, seek decent jobs or look for promotions.
The question came to the Supreme Court, and in the initial decision, the Court split, with four members asserting that affirmative action plans involving racial classification were permissible under the Fourteenth Amendment, and four others claiming that any racial considerations violated the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
Justice Lewis Powell believed that some affirmative action plans, if carefully crafted, could pass both constitutional and statutory scrutiny, and he shaped a classic transitional decision.
The decision did not really answer the questions raised by affirmative action, but paved the way for the Court and the society to adopt some affirmative action plans, and to begin the debate over just how far to go in this difficult area.
Because the landmark decisions in this area arose in response to the continued exclusion of Negroes from the mainstream of American society, they could be characterized as involving discrimination by the "majority" white race against the Negro minority.
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978) was a landmark case in which the U.S. Supreme Court first addressed the merits of a claim on affirmative action, also identified by critics as race-conscious admissions policies or reverse discrimination (the term used in the plaintiff’s complaint), an extremely controversial topic with regard to admissions programs in higher education.
At issue in Bakke was whether the separate admissions policy that officials at the medical school of the University of California at Davis used for disadvantaged minorities violated the Fourteenth Amendment Equal Protection Clause and/or Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
In light of the impact that Bakke has had on affirmative action plans in higher education, this entry reviews the case in detail.
In 1968, the UC Davis School of Medicine had opened with 50 students; in 1971, officials admitted a class of 100 students.
The suit alleged that the special admissions program operated to exclude the plaintiff on the basis of race, in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and Section 601 of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Having sidestepped the merits of such a claim in DeFunis v. Odegaard (1974), wherein it decided that that a white law student’s challenge to an affirmative policy was moot because he was in his final year of study, and after granting an initial stay of the order of the Supreme Court of California, the Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal.
Justice Powell, in helping to create the plurality, viewed the policy as having violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The dissenting justices feared that such an affirmative action policy was discriminatory.
Although the Bakke decision was made by a plurality, it stands out as the first case in a steady stream of litigation over affirmative action plans in a variety of settings in higher education and beyond.
The Court upheld affirmative action policies used in the University of Michigan School of Law (Grutter) but rejected such policies in the same university’s undergraduate programs (Gratz).
The Bakke case: Race, education, and affirmative action.
DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974), on remand, 514 P.2d 438 (Wash. 1974).
After his second rejection, respondent filed this action in state court for mandatory, injunctive, and declaratory relief to compel his admission to Davis, alleging that the special admissions program operated to exclude him on the basis of his race in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, a provision of the California Constitution, and § 601 of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which provides, inter alia, that no person shall on the ground of race or color be excluded from participating in any program receiving federal financial assistance.
In order to understand the role of affirmative action in today’s society, we must first understand the history of affirmative action.
The first publicized Supreme Court case that challenged affirmative action was the Regents of the University of California v. Bakke.
Allan P. Bakke was rejected from the Davis School of Medicine, twice.
The University of California Davis School of Medicine used quotas to ensure diversity.
The Supreme Court of California ruled that the Davis School of Medicine admissions program violated the constitutional rights of white applicants.
Due to a plurality opinion, Bakke was admitted acceptance, based on the fact that the University of California went too far in enforcing affirmative action.
In the end, he received over $150,000 and attended the Davis School of Medicine, despite his highly publicized court case.
Because the ruling was based on a plurality opinion, meaning the court did not come to one unanimous decision, it was unclear whether a precedent for affirmative action was set.
Therefore, the roll of affirmative action in admission to higher education programs went unchanged.
It was not until a 2003 Supreme Court Case, Grutter v. Bollinger, that the court set a precedent regarding affirmative action.
After I researched this case further in depth, it split my opinion on affirmative action even more.
As I said before, in high school this case provided me with evidence to form my opinion that affirmative action is unconstitutional.
It has become clear that race was not considered as the only factor, and many other components played a role in Bakke’s rejection from the University of California Davis School of Medicine.
The Court also held, however, that the use of quotas in such affirmative action programs was not permissible; thus the Univ. of California, Davis, medical school had, by maintaining a 16% minority quota, discriminated against Allan Bakke, 1940–, a white applicant.
