Bricker Amendment

Supporters of the Bricker Amendment, including leaders of the American Bar Association, found virtue in the proposal for various reasons.
The Bricker Amendment, approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee in June 1953, reaffirmed the Constitution's supremacy over treaties; required implementing legislation "which would be valid in the absence of treaty" before a treaty could be effected within the United States; and granted Congress the authority to regulate all executive agreements.
The Bricker Amendment was defeated in the Senate on 25 February 1954 by a vote of 50 to 42.
But Ike soon soured on his conservative champion because Dean Manion had become an advocate of the Bricker Amendment, a Constitutional measure designed to prevent the now-familiar disintegration of American sovereignty under the attack of international organizations and treaties.
He fired dad in early 1954, the Bricker Amendment failed, and the first "Republican" administration in twenty years closed the door on conservatism.
“The heart and soul of patriotic America”: American conservative women crusading for the “Bricker Amendment” (1953-1957)
This paper will examine the crusade that a group of conservative women, the Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment (VWBA), active in the Republican Party and conservative women’s clubs, carried out to pressure politicians and sway public opinion in favor of the so-called “Bricker Amendment,” devised to limit the treaty-making powers of the President in the 1950s.
Keywords :Bricker amendment, treaty law, anti-internationalism, conservative women, “kitchen table” activism, domesticity, populism, Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment, Minute Women of the USA, Inc., Daughters of the American Revolution
1 American conservative women’s activism from the 1910s to the 1940s: what legacy for Cold War conservative women?
2 Cold War conservative women, domesticity and the growth of “kitchen table” activism
3 “The Fight for the Bricker Amendment is On!”
3.2 Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment (1953-57): origins, organization and membership profile
Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment “on its way out” (1956-57)
In the early 1950s, so as to restore American sovereignty, a Republican senator from Ohio, John W. Bricker, supported by the most conservative fringe of the Republican Party, proposed an amendment aiming at limiting the President’s power to sign international treaties that might supersede the Constitution.
Thousands of women, active in the Republican Party and conservative organizations, coordinated their efforts as the Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment (VWBA) in order to sway public opinion (which was much divided) and pressure their representatives.
This paper will finally consider the significance of the domestic ideology and populist rhetoric in the pro-Bricker Amendment movement’s literature and public discourse.
1 American conservative women’s activism from the 1910s to the 1940s: what legacy for Cold War conservative women?
6Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendmentwas to rely heavily on the populist turn taken by right-wing women in the 1930s and 1940s, but its leaders would cautiously deny any linkage with them and endeavor to renew with a less aggressive political style and burnish their image.
2 Cold War conservative women, domesticity and the growth of “kitchen table” activism
7Conservative women’s political action after the war needs to be examined against the backdrop of the early Cold War culture which concurrently emphasized domesticityvii and women’s moral obligation to increase their civic and political engagement.
8After WWII, American women’s accelerating process of politicization – in terms of both electoral participation and mobilization as campaign workers – led many contemporary media observers to state that the early 1950s marked a turning point for women in American politics.x They focused on the landmark 1952 election campaign during which political parties – most particularly the GOP – put more effort than ever before into getting women’s vote.
3 “The Fight for the Bricker Amendment is On!”
The American Bar Association (ABA), then presided by Frank E. Holman, strenuously opposed the Covenant on Human Rights proposed by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in 1948 and the Genocide Convention in 1949.
This particularly incensed conservative Republicans and southern Segregationists in the Democratic Party who feared the United Nations might intervene in American affairs by advocating federal civil rights legislation, thus curtailing states’ rights.xix The “Bricker Amendment” was therefore an act of rebellion against the aggrandized powers of the federal government and presidential function under Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The Bricker resolution, not acted upon, was followed by the two first versions (S.J. Res 102 in 1951 and S.J. Res 130 in 1952) of what was to be henceforth known as “the Bricker Amendment.”
When the session adjourned, no action had been taken on the bill but it gave time to the backers of the “Bricker Amendment” to start organizing their popular campaign in anticipation of the debates that were to resume in January 1954.
3.2 Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment (1953-57): origins, organization and membership profile
15In August 1953 eight women from the Great Lakes region gathered in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and created Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment.
According to one of the founders, Ruth Murray, the amendment represented the best chance to unify conservatives, as she later told the Senate Judiciary Sub-Committee headed by Senator Estes Kefauver in May 1955: ‘It seemed to be the one banner around which all defenders of American sovereignty could rally.”
xxiii They adopted the torch-bearing hand as a symbol for their own enlightenment and alertness and “the battle for the Bricker Amendment is On!”
21Brickerettes’ political action truly came in the limelight when they staged a rally in Washington, D.C. in January 1954, before the debates over the Bricker Amendment started.
22Notwithstanding the lobbying work of the Vigilant Women, the controversial Bricker Amendment received a vote of only 52-40 in favor.
In 1955, in order to sustain their “program of education,” VWBA had to launch a fundraising campaign which allowed them to print 300,000 copies of “Why We Need the Bricker Amendment” and circulate other such articles, speeches and pamphlets regarding treaty law.
Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment “on its way out” (1956-57)
In their November 1955 newsletter, they warned “vigilant workers” to “beware of toothless substitutes for the Bricker Amendment”:
We would rather have no treaty-control amendment than one which fails adequately to protect personal rights and American sovereignty against dangerous international agreements.xxxvii
The situation left the most zealous conservative women intensely disappointed; after reading a US News and World Report from March 1956 which presented the last version of the “Bricker Amendment” to date [the so-called Dirksen substitute], Lucille Cardin Crain voiced her disillusionment with the main male leaders of the movement: “Hope we will thoroughly examine this [bill] and not be fooled again – and not take Webb’s words – or Bricker’s or Holman’s for everything – after all they still favor the UN.”
xl An editorial in the Clovis News Journal recounted that Ruth Murray and Winifred Barker opposed the Dirksen measure for its “verbiage” weakened the original language of the Bricker Amendment.
Ruth Murray wrote on behalf of Winifred Barker and herself that they did not wish to make further comment as their position on the Bricker Amendment remained as unchanged as ever; they would not back an inadequate bill but signaled their readiness to embark on their crusade again:
In early Cold War America, male and female politicians, Republicans and Democrats, were apt to redefine women’s role and extend their sphere of action but remained attached to a traditional vision of womanhood.
28Overall, conservative women were able and ready to adapt their discourse: with the Bricker Amendment, they participated to a constitutional debate led by influential American jurists, which made them more likely to use their knowledge of law, albeit limited for some, than to deploy traditional arguments regarding gender roles.
31In the same way, Ruth Murray assured the committee that the campaign for the Bricker Amendment was run along constitutional lines: “the VWBA and like-minded organizations are working in an honest and open manner to amend the constitution in the manner prescribed by the Constitution for its alteration.”
In fact, a large network of conservative women’s groups mobilized their resources to form VWBA, as historian Allan J. Lichtman explained: “The DAR and Minute Women fired up their telephone networks to form the Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment.”
lxvii At any rate, if the VWBA’s public discourse did not highlight the relations with MWUSA, their literature addressed to Brickerites contained extensive references to it and DAR as the other leading patriotic women’s organizations endorsing the Bricker Amendment.
Anticommunist and anti-internationalist Cold War women manifestly embraced but also helped challenge this ideology by taking interest in international relations and playing an active role in politics.
The growth in home-centered activism appeared to signify reconciliation between the many (and at times, contradictory) roles Cold War society assigned to America women.
It was long though before historians started taking interest in right-wing women’s activism in the early Cold War years and acknowledging the influence of such behind-the-scenes activism conducted in women’s living rooms and kitchens.
Admittedly, VWBA failed as neither the Bricker Amendment nor any of the substitute versions were adopted in Congress.
42The history of the fight for the Bricker Amendment points to the potential and limits of kitchen-table activism for these postwar conservative women.
To a certain extent, the outcome of the pro-Bricker Amendment struggle even heightened these women’s crusading zeal and created a certain distrust of the Republican political establishment for having accepted compromise and given up the fight too soon.
Holman, Frank E. Story of the Bricker Amendment (First Phase).
Cold War Women: The International Activities of American Women’s Organizations.
The Bricker Amendment Controversy: A Test of Eisenhower’s Political Leadership.
vii  Elaine Tyler May, Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era (New York: Basic Books, 1999).
xviii  Nelson Richards, “The Bricker Amendment and Congress’s Failure to Check the Inflation of the Executive’s Foreign Affairs powers, 1951-1954,” California Law Review 94.175: 176.
xix  See “Bricker Amendment,” The Crisis, August-September 1953, 442.
“. . . the so-called Bricker Amendment to limit the treaty-making powers of the executive branch of government . . . is primarily motivated by conservative anti-civil rights forces of the American Bar Association and Dixiecrats.”
xxii  Bricker cited in Lucille C. Crain, “The Bricker Amendment Battle Is On!”
xxiii Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment (VWBA) Newsletter, May 1955.
The two groups’ memberships overlapped in the early 1950s; yet, I have found no evidence so far that non-white women may have been members of VWBA.
xxx  Drew Pearson, “Washington Merry-Go-Round: Wiley Stands His Ground on Bricker Amendment,” St Petersburg Times, 2 February 1954, 6.
Frank E. Holman, Story of the Bricker Amendment (The First Phase), New York: Committee for Constitutional Government, Inc. 1954, 87.
This newsletter was published by Forest Allen Mann (Hinsdale, Illinois) for the far-right Christian Patriots Crusade group under FBI investigation in the mid-1950s.
xliii  On the enduring influence of the Bricker Amendment or “lingering Brickeritis,” see William Korey, “Human Rights Treaties: Why is the U.S. Stalling?”
Thomas E. Woods, Jr., “Globalism and Sovereignty: A Short History of the Bricker Amendment,” The Freeman46.4 (April 1996): 200-204.
xlviii  Helen Laville, Cold War Women: The International Activities of American Women's Organizations (Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2002), 26.
Speech delivered to the Vigilant Women for the Bricker Amendment of Illinois.
liii  Holman, Bricker Amendment, 65.
lv  Frank E. Holman, “Personal Message to the Vigilant and Patriotic Women of America supporting the Bricker Amendment,” Seattle, Washington, January 6, 1954.
lxxiii  Frank E. Holman, “The Increasing Need for a Constitutional Amendment on Treaties and Executive Agreements,” (Seattle, WA, 1955), 674.
Florence Kaczorowski, « “The heart and soul of patriotic America”: American conservative women crusading for the “Bricker Amendment” (1953-1957) », European journal of American studies [Online], Vol 10, no 1 | 2015, document 1.3, Online since 31 March 2015, connection on 21 March 2016.
Why did Eisenhower oppose The Bricker Amendment?
Since the Cold War the executive has enlarged its foreign relations power.
While scholars have debated whether the Cold War actually justified the extent of executive power, they have generally accepted as a self-evident proposition that the president's authority should expand in response to geopolitical circumstances.
Paul traces the origin of this discourse to the domestic debates over the Bricker Amendment, McCarthysm and the War in Indochina and shows how courts used this justificatory rhetoric to construct a new method for interpreting the president's constitutional powers.
Paul challenges the continued reliance on Cold War discourse and offers an alternative approach to adjudicating questions on the reach of executive foreign relations power.
Bricker Amendment
Bricker Amendment: Historical background
The Bricker Amendment controversy grew from the strong vein of non-interventionism, nationalism, and suspicion of foreign influences that has existed from the beginnings of the American republic.
"Non-interventionism was the considered response to foreign and domestic developments of a large, responsible, and respectable segment of the American people," wrote one historian of the movement.
Once hostilities were concluded, Republican Senators William Borah of Idaho and Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts led like-minded colleagues in the United States Senate to reject the Treaty of Versailles and to avoid joining both international agencies created by it, the League of Nations and the World Court, for fear of losing American sovereignty.
Suspicions of the U.N. and its associated international organizations were fanned by conservatives, most notably by Frank E. Holman, an attorney from Seattle, Washington in what has been called a "crusade."
Holman, a Utah native and Rhodes scholar, was elected president of the American Bar Association in 1947 and dedicated his term as president to warning Americans of the dangers of "treaty law."
Duane Tananbaum, the leading historian of the Bricker Amendment, wrote "most of ABA's objections to the Genocide Convention had no basis whatsoever in reality" and his example of a car accident becoming an international incident was not possible.
In Holman's own book advancing the Bricker Amendment he wrote the U.N. Charter meant the Federal government could:
Bricker Amendment: Legal background
The United States Constitution, effective in 1789, gave the Federal government power over foreign affairs and restricted the individual States' authority in this realm.
Proponents of the Bricker Amendment said this language made it essential to add to the Constitution explicit limitations on the treaty-making power.
In the course of recognizing the USSR, letters were exchanged with the Soviet Union's foreign minister, Maxim Litvinov, to settle claims between the two countries, in an agreement neither sent to the Senate nor ratified by it.
Though the United States Supreme Court found this illegal, Vinson's defense of this sweeping exercise of executive authority was used to justify the Bricker Amendment.
Some state courts issued rulings in the 1940s and 1950s that relied on the United Nations Charter, much to the alarm of Holman and others.
It was, the American Bar Association declared, "one of the greatest constitutional crises the country has ever faced."
In a speech to the American Bar Association's regional meeting at Louisville, Kentucky on April 11, 1952, John Foster Dulles, an American delegate to the United Nations, said, "Treaties make international law and they also make domestic law.
Frank E. Holman wrote Secretary of State George Marshall in November 1948 regarding the dangers of the Human Rights Declaration, receiving the dismissive reply that the agreement was "merely declaratory in character" and had no legal effect.
Frank E. Holman testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee that the Bricker Amendment was needed "to eliminate the risk that through 'treaty law' our basic American rights may be bargained away in attempts to show our good neighborliness and to indicate to the rest of the world our spirit of brotherhood."
Bricker Amendment: Congress considers the proposal
Historians describe the Bricker Amendment as "the high water mark of the non-interventionist surge in the 1950s" and "the embodiment of the Old Guard's rage at what it viewed as twenty years of presidential usurpation of Congress's constitutional powers" which "grew out of sentiment both anti-Democrat and anti-presidential."
The American Bar Association was still studying the issue of how to prevent an abuse of "treaty law" when Bricker introduced his resolution on July 17, 1951, without the ABA's involvement, but the Senator wanted to begin immediate debate on an issue he considered vital.
President Harry S. Truman was adamantly opposed to limitations on executive power and ordered every executive branch agency to report on how the Bricker Amendment would affect its work and to offer this information to the Judiciary Committee.
Bricker introduced his proposal, S.J. Res 1, on the first day of the 83rd Congress and soon had sixty-three co-sponsors on a resolution much closer to the language of the amendment proposed by the American Bar Association.
No one could vote against the Bricker Amendment with impunity and very few could vote against it and survive at all... There was no hope of stopping it through direct opposition."
Eisenhower publicly stated his opposition in his press conference of March 26, 1953: "The Bricker Amendment, as analyzed for me by the Secretary of State, would, as I understand it, in certain ways restrict the authority that the President must have, if he is to conduct the foreign affairs of this Nation effectively.... I do believe that there are certain features that would work to the disadvantage of our country, particularly in making it impossible for the President to work with the flexibility that he needs in this highly complicated and difficult situation."
Sherman Adams wrote "Eisenhower thus found himself caught in a crossfire between the Republican conservatives and the State Department" and stated President Eisenhower thought the Bricker Amendment was a refusal of America "to accept the leadership of world democracy that had been thrust upon it."
In 1954, Eisenhower wrote Senate majority leader William F. Knowland of California stating, "Adoption of the Bricker Amendment in its present form by the Senate would be notice to our friends as well as our enemies abroad that our country intends to withdraw from its leadership in world affairs."
Supporting the Bricker Amendment were the National Association of Attorneys General, the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the Marine Corps League, National Sojourners, the Catholic War Veterans, the Kiwanis, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Grange, the American Farm Bureau Federation, the Daughters of the American Revolution, The Colonial Dames of America, the National Association of Evangelicals, the American Medical Association, the General Federation of Women's Clubs, and the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons.
In January, he claimed that the Bricker Amendment would fatally weaken the bargaining position of the United States because the states would be involved in foreign policy, recalling the divisions under the Articles of Confederation.
In fact, President Eisenhower himself in January 1954 said that nobody understood the Bricker Amendment, but his position "was clear; he opposed any amendment that would reduce the President's power to conduct foreign policy."
By the time the Senate finally voted on the Bricker Amendment on February 26, thirteen of the nineteen Democrats who had co-sponsored it had withdrawn their support, at the urging of Senators Johnson and George.
In the final count, thirty-two Republicans voted for the revised Bricker Amendment and fourteen voted against.
"By the mid-1950s," wrote the Senator's biographer, "Bricker had become alienated from the mainstream of his own party... fulminating on the far right of the political spectrum."
Bricker Amendment: Aftermath
The Bricker Amendment is occasionally revived in Congress.
For example, in 1997, Representative Helen Chenoweth offered her version of the Bricker Amendment in the 105th Congress.
Senator John W. Bricker, the sponsor of the proposed constitutional amendment to limit the "treaty power" of the United States government The Bricker Amendment is the collective name of a number of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution considered by the United States Senate in the 1950s.
Each of these amendments would have placed restrictions on the scope and ratification of treaties and executive agreements entered into by the United States and are named for their sponsor, Senator John W. Bricker of Ohio, a conservative Republican.
Non-interventionism, the view that the United States should not become embroiled in foreign conflicts and world politics, has always been an element in American politics but was especially strong in the years following World War I. American entry into World War II temporarily suppressed non-interventionist sentiments, but they returned in the post-war years in response to America's new international role, particularly as a reaction to the new United Nations and its affiliated international organizations.
Some feared the loss of American sovereignty to these transnational agencies, because of the Soviet Union's role in the spread of international Communism and the Cold War.
Frank E. Holman, president of the American Bar Association, called attention to state and Federal court decisions, notably Missouri v. Holland, which he claimed could give international treaties and agreements precedence over the United States Constitution and could be used by foreigners to threaten American liberties.
The best-known version of the Bricker Amendment, considered by the Senate in 1953–54, declared that no treaty could be made by the United States that conflicted with the Constitution, was self-executing without the passage of separate enabling legislation through Congress, or which granted Congress legislative powers beyond those specified in the Constitution.
Bricker's proposal attracted broad bipartisan support and was a focal point of intra-party conflict between the administration of president Dwight D. Eisenhower and the Old Right faction of conservative Republican senators.
Despite the initial support, the Bricker Amendment was blocked through the intervention of President Eisenhower and failed in the Senate by a single vote in 1954.
BRICKER, John William, a Senator from Ohio; born on a farm near Mount Sterling, Madison County, Ohio, September 6, 1893; attended the country schools; graduated from Ohio State University at Columbus in 1916 and from its law department in 1920; admitted to the bar in 1917 and commenced practice in Columbus, Ohio, in 1920; during the First World War served as first lieutenant and chaplain in the United States Army in 1917 and 1918; solicitor for Grandview Heights, Ohio 1920-1928; assistant attorney general of Ohio 1923-1927; member of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio 1929-1932; attorney general of Ohio 1933-1937; Governor of Ohio 1939-1945; unsuccessful Republican candidate for Vice President in 1944; elected as a Republican to the United States Senate in 1946, reelected in 1952 and served from January 3, 1947, to January 3, 1959; unsuccessful candidate for reelection in 1958; chairman, Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce (Eighty-third Congress); resumed the practice of law; died in Columbus, Ohio, March 22, 1986; interment in Greenlawn Cemetery.
The Bricker Amendment Controversy: A Test of Eisenhower’s Political Leadership.
Written by John F. Kennedy as senator from Massachusetts on United States Senate stationary, Washington, D.C. Dated: Monday, March 22, 1954To: Mr. Neil LeonardBingham, Dana & Gould1 Federal StreetBoston, MassachusettsDear Mr. Leonard: Thank you for writing to me concerning my vote on the Bricker Amendment.
The Bricker Amendment is the collective name of a number of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution considered by the United States Senate in the 1950s.
Each of these amendments would have placed restrictions on the scope and ratification of treaties and executive agreements entered into by the United States and are named for their sponsor, Senator John W. Bricker of Ohio, a conservative Republican.The best-known version of the Bricker Amendment, considered by the Senate in 1953–54, declared that no treaty could be made by the United States that conflicted with the Constitution, was self-executing without the passage of separate enabling legislation through Congress, or which granted Congress legislative powers beyond those specified in the Constitution.
It also limited the president's power to enter into executive agreements with foreign powers.Bricker's proposal attracted broad bipartisan support and was a focal point of intra-party conflict between the administration of president Dwight D. Eisenhower and the Old Right faction of conservative Republican senators.
Despite the initial support, the Bricker Amendment was blocked through the intervention of President Eisenhower and failed in the Senate by a single vote in 1954.
United States Senate
United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, First Session,
The Committee on Foreign Relations of the United States Senate...     3
of the United States Senate
Lodge to protect American sovereignty.
institutions for the post-Cold War world--shutting down two
since the end of the Cold War--the expansion of NATO to include
United States Senate, (See Appendix VI, Bibliography, page 119).
reiterating the supremacy of the United States Constitution.
parliamentary delegation from the Soviet Union.
the former Soviet Union and member states of the North Atlantic
at Arms and Doorkeeper, United States Senate,
United States Senate;
Hammond, Paul Y.  Cold War and Detente: The American Foreign
Foreign Relations, United States Senate, 97th Congress,
of the United States Senate.
on Foreign Relations, United States Senate.
John W. Bricker, in full John William Bricker (born Sept. 6, 1893, Madison county, Ohio, U.S.—died March 22, 1986, Columbus, Ohio), conservative Republican politician who held state and national public offices for many years; he was the unsuccessful candidate for vice president of the United States in 1944.
In 1953 he sponsored a constitutional amendment that came to be known as the Bricker Amendment.
Ultimately defeated, the Bricker Amendment was greatly attenuated during the debate by elimination of the restriction upon the enforcement of formal treaties.
The Bricker Amendment: A Battle against the Imperial Presidency
Out of power for some 20 years in the early 1950s, many Republicans had been critics of the secretive foreign policy of Democratic presidents in the 1930s and 1940s.
The Bricker amendment in its various incarnations was actually a collection of proposed amendments to the Constitution that not only would have prohibited treaties that conflicted with the Constitution but also would have restricted the ability of presidents to enter into executive agreements.
The amendment was originally offered and generally backed by Republicans who were upset by Franklin Roosevelt’s and Harry Truman’s foreign policies in the 1940s and 1950s.
It represented “the high water mark of the isolationist surge in the 1950s,” one historian wrote.
Bricker was strongly backed in his efforts by Frank Holman, president of the American Bar Association.
By the early 1950s, Holman charged that through the use of executive fiat, “the forces of autocracy and bureaucracy were moving toward a centralized government so powerful as to destroy the rights of the individual, the rights of states, and the right to local self-government.”
Yet, because it mustered many votes and came close to passage, “the fight over the Bricker amendment had important consequences,” writes Duane Tananbaum in The Bricker Amendment Controversy.
It was the battle over the proposed “Bricker Amendment” to the United States Constitution.
Regrettably, the Bricker Amendment’s failure left in doubt the questionable nexus between the UN treaty and the American Constitution.
For many years, members of Congress attempted to supersede it, through what was known as the Bricker Amendment (so-named for Ohio Republican Senator John Bricker).
Truman, Treaties, and the Bricker Amendment
The only problem with the UN's practical workings came with the onset of the Cold War.
The Soviet Union began using its veto power in its own interests.
What is interesting, is that Professor Turner in putting so much stock in the UN Charter as a source of presidential power has highlighted precisely the problem that Senator John Bricker (R., Ohio) raised, and sought to correct with his much-abused Bricker Amendment.
It seems to me that Professor Turner may have inadvertently reopened the case of the Bricker Amendment; whether there is a case for the Amendment is a topic I shall take up at my next opportunity.
This special relationship however, does not preclude the legal obligations that United States signed on to when the U.S. Congress ratified the Charter in accordance with Article 6 of the United States Constitution (not to be confused with a Resolution like the Newlands Resolution, which asserted without Constitutional authority, to “annex” Hawaii in 1898).
The ratification of the U.N. Charter was now the law of the land, and of course, many lawyers despised this new law, including Frank E. Holman, the past-President of the American Bar Association.
As one of the drafters of the 1952 Bricker Amendment, Holman sought to amend the Article Six “treaty law” so as to prevent the Charter from subordinating the Bill of Rights and States’ Rights.
There soon began a concerted effort led by Senator Knowland (also a proponent of the Bricker Amendment) and supported by Senator Bricker, to remove Hawaii from the list of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The real conspiracy theory that you refer to, if there is one, really resides with the Bricker Amendment and not with the “oversight” by the Secretary-General.
