Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd

Statutes – Interpretation – Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) ("the Act") – First respondent negotiated with and formed contracts with State and Territory governments for the supply of medical products in circumstances where State and Territory governments were not carrying on a business – Trial judge found that, but for the application of derivative Crown immunity, the first respondent had contravened ss 46 and 47 of the Act in relation to pre-contractual conduct – Whether the provisions of ss 46 and 47 applied to the conduct of the first respondent – Nature and extent of available relief.
Statutes – Operation and effect of statutes – Crown immunity – Derivative immunity – Bradken Consolidated Ltd v Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd (1979) 145 CLR 107 – Whether the presumption of Crown immunity creates a presumption against legislation having an incidence in legal effect upon the Crown – Whether the presumption of Crown immunity creates a presumption against legislation affecting Crown "freedoms" or governmental, commercial or political "interests" – Whether the Commonwealth, States and Territories are manifestations of the Crown – Whether Crown immunities apply as such to the Commonwealth, States and Territories – Whether different notions of governmental immunity are suggested or required by the Australian Constitution.
Constitutional law (Cth) – Crown immunity – Whether Crown immunity is applicable without modification to the Commonwealth, States and Territories provided for in the Constitution.
Words and phrases – "bind", "derivative Crown immunity", "incidence in legal effect".
Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) – ss 2, 2A, 2B, 4L, 6, 46, 47, 51, 87, 87A.
In brief: The Full Federal Court has handed down its much-awaited decision in Baxter concerning bundling practices.
While bundling practices can be pro-competitive, Baxter is the first case in which bundling was found to have contravened the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth).
The Full Federal Court handed down its decision in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd 1 on 11 August 2008.
Justices Mansfield and Gyles (Justice Dowsett dissenting) found that Baxter contravened sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) (the TPA) when tendering, negotiating and entering into agreements to supply a bundled package of sterile fluids and peritoneal dialysis (PD) fluids to state purchasing authorities (SPAs).
The matter has been remitted to a single judge of the Federal Court to consider whether penalties should be imposed and other relief.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (the ACCC) commenced proceedings against Baxter in 2005, alleging that:
At first instance, Justice Allsop would have found that Baxter contravened s46 in relation to one offer and s47 in relation to all offers except for in the ACT.
However, Justice Allsop found that the TPA did not apply to Baxter, as it was entitled to derivative Crown immunity.
The High Court reversed that decision and remitted the matter to the Full Court.
The ACCC also contended on appeal that Baxter's conduct had both the purpose and effect, or likely effect, of substantially impeding or hindering 'the wider competitive process' in the market.
* Baxter has now applied to the High Court for special leave to appeal and the penalty hearing has been adjourned.
On 29 May 2007, the ACCC failed in its bid to have eight Geelong petrol retailers found guilty of price-fixing by the Federal Court.
The decision, in ACCC v Leahy Petroleum Pty Ltd [2007] FCA 7941, represents another illustration of the difficulties associated with establishing a breach of s 45 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) by relying on circumstantial evidence.
In November 2003, the ACCC commenced proceedings against eight petrol retailers and 10 individuals in the Geelong area for alleged contraventions of s 45 of the TP Act.
The ACCC alleged that these communications gave rise to eight separate “understandings”, seven of which each involved two retailers and one of which involved three retailers.
The evidence used by the ACCC to support its allegations came in a number of forms:
a number of individuals gave direct evidence on behalf of the ACCC at the trial, and
The absence of any element of commitment or obligation was, in Justice Gray’s view, fatal to the ACCC’s case, as “an arrangement or understanding in which each party is free to do as it wishes is a creature unknown to s 45(2) of the Trade Practices Act” (at [948]).
Accordingly, he concluded that the overall effect of the evidence was that it was more probable than not that none of the arrangements or understandings alleged by the ACCC in fact existed.
This decision also shows how difficult it can be for the ACCC to establish breaches of s 45 of the TP Act, even where parties are willing to cooperate with the ACCC in its investigations, make admissions and provide direct written and oral evidence.
the admissions made by certain participants were said to be of no assistance to the ACCC as they were very general in nature and failed to address each of the elements necessary to establish price fixing
the data presented by the ACCC — records of communications and price patterns over the period in question — was found to be equivocal at best as to a connection between the timing of the communications and changes in price, and in some instances suggested that prices changed independently of communications had between competitors.
In addition, the court noted that the requirement that witnesses benefiting from leniency from ACCC prosecution cooperate with the ACCC may provide an incentive for those witnesses to give evidence maximising the role of others, which in this case led to the judge to prefer evidence given “in the box” over written statements negotiated with the ACCC.
As a practical matter, the decision leaves the ACCC with a multi-million dollar legal bill, and raises questions about the effective prosecution of cartel conduct.
The ACCC has stated that it is considering whether to appeal the Geelong decision, as well as options to provide the ACCC with greater investigatory powers.
Related case — This decision follows an unsuccessful appeal by the ACCC to the High Court on alleged price fixing in Ballarat.
In those proceedings, the ACCC sought to reverse a decision by the Full Court of the Federal Court that overturned $3.2 million in penalties previously imposed on APCO and its proprietor, Mr Anderson, finding that APCO set its prices on the basis of its own commercial interests (in full knowledge of the information supplied by its competitors) rather than as a consequence of a commitment to other retailers: see APCO Service Stations Pty Ltd v ACCC (2005) ATPR¶42-078 and ACCC v APCO Service Stations Pty Ltd [2006] HCA Trans 272.
In addition to argument as to whether there was a breach of a contractual warranty that a high rate of availability would be achieved and the assessment of any damages for breach of warranty, the parties were also in dispute as to what method should be adopted in assessing damages under the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) and whether leave should be granted to Gough & Gilmore to amend its defence to the cross claim.
PCE argued that the applicable law had been changed by the High Court in Murphy v Overton Investments Pty Ltd (2004) ATPR ¶41-973.
GenRx brought proceedings against Servier, alleging contravention of s 52, 53 and 55 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) in the course of advertising and promoting Coversyl.
In mid 2004, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) brought proceedings in the Federal Court against Dynacast, Mr Alan Jorgensen (a former director and major shareholder of Phoneflasher who purported to act on behalf of Phoneflasher in Australia), Ms Jimeale Jorgensen (who was a previous director of the Phoneflasher) and others.
The ACCC alleged that together, Phoneflasher, Mr Jorgensen and Ms Jorgensen had falsely represented on Phoneflasher’s website that using the mobile phone accessory would reduce harmful radiation exposure to the user of the telephone and therefore had associated health benefits.
Neither the Federal Court nor the ACCC were notified of this change prior to the making of the consent orders.
provide the ACCC with a list of the names and addresses of the customers to which it had provided the corrective material
The ACCC brought contempt proceedings against Dynacast and Mr Jorgensen in October 2005, unsatisfied that compliance with the consent orders had been effected.
The ACCC joined a number of other parties to the contempt proceedings.
As against Dynacast, the ACCC pressed four charges, to the effect that, while trading as Phoneflasher, it had failed to comply with the consent orders.
The ACCC argued that Mr Jorgensen had committed a contempt by aiding and abetting, counselling and procuring Phoneflasher’s failure or refusal to comply with the consent orders, or in the alternative, wilfully refrained from taking any reasonable steps to ensure that Phoneflasher did comply with its obligations under the Consent Orders.
These charges were dependent on the ACCC successfully showing that Mr Jorgensen was,at all relevant times, acting as an officer or director for the purposes of s 9 of the Corporations Act 2001, and as such, had authority to act on its behalf.
In 2002 and 2003, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) received complaints from Festool retailers and customers that Tooltechnic had attempted to induce Festool retailers not to sell Festool products for a price less than the recommended trade price.
The ACCC commenced an investigation into this conduct and brought proceedings against Tooltechnic for alleged resale price maintenance in contravention of s 48 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act).
The ACCC alleged three contraventions of the Act, all in relation to discussions between Tooltechnic’s then Queensland area managers and Festool retailers between November 2001 and May 2002.
Both Tooltechnic and its Managing Director offered the ACCC an undertaking under s 87B of the TP Act.
It was also agreed between the parties that Tooltechnic pay the ACCC’s costs in the sum of $25,000.
On 22 November 2004, Amcor approached the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and foreshadowed an application for immunity regarding cartel conduct in relation to corrugated fibre board packaging between 2002 and 2004, pursuant to the ACCC’s June 2003 Leniency Policy for Cartel Conduct.
At that time, Amcor informed the ACCC that it was able to provide audio recordings of discussions between Amcor executives, and Amcor and Visy, which it had obtained pursuant to an Anton Pillar order in unrelated Federal Court proceedings.
The ACCC’s Chairman, Graeme Samuel, instructed the ACCC’s General Counsel, Mr Robert Alexander, and Mr Geoffrey Williams (a director in the ACCC’s Enforcement Division) to work on the matter and to report directly to him rather than to the ACCC’s Enforcement Committee.
On 22 November 2004, the ACCC issued a notice to produce documents to Amcor under s 155(1)(b) of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act), and on 24 November 2004 issued a notice to produce documents under s 155(1)(b) to Visy.
On or about 25 November 2004, the ACCC instructed counsel to seek leave in the extant Federal Court proceedings to use the audio recordings.
On 7 and 8 December 2004, the ACCC received transcripts of the audio recordings.
In this period, Mr Williams also spoke with a solicitor with the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) regarding the engagement of AGS as the ACCC’s solicitors and the possibility of engaging counsel.
On 16 December 2004, the ACCC’s Enforcement Committee met and directed that Amcor be granted conditional leniency.
Between 16 December 2004 and 28 November 2005, the ACCC interviewed a number of witnesses, issued various notices under s 155 and conducted a number of examinations of Visy executives under s 155.
On 28 November 2005, the ACCC made an in-principle decision to institute proceedings as recommended by Mr Alexander and Mr Williams, and on 16 December 2005, the ACCC made a final decision to institute proceedings.
On 21 December 2005, the ACCC commenced proceedings against Visy Industries Holdings Pty Ltd, Visy Industries Australia Pty Ltd, Visy Board Pty Ltd, and three current and former officers (Visy), alleging that companies in the Visy group and certain officers of those companies had engaged in price fixing and market sharing with companies in the Amcor group in breach of s 45 of the TP Act.
As part of discovery and pursuant to notices to produce, Visy sought access to the transcripts of the audio recordings and other direct evidence held by the ACCC, correspondence between the ACCC and Amcor, and internal ACCC documents.
The ACCC claimed legal professional privilege over documents created after 15 December 2004 on the basis that, from that date, litigation was reasonably anticipated by the ACCC.
The ACCC relied on an affidavit of Mr Alexander, in which he deposed that, following the interview of Amcor’s former managing director on 15 December 2004:
(a) he formed the opinion that the ACCC would commence proceedings against Visy in relation to the allegations made by Amcor
(b) he had determined that he would recommend to the ACCC that such proceedings be commenced, and
Visy sought to compel production of the documents over which the ACCC asserted privilege on the ground that it was the ACCC’s resolution to commence proceedings, and not the view of Mr Alexander or Mr Williams, that was relevant.
The relevant date from which privilege could accrue, Visy argued, was 28 November 2005, being the date on which the ACCC resolved in-principle to commence proceedings and the documents were therefore not privileged.
In addition, Visy submitted that it was not reasonable for the ACCC to anticipate litigation as at 15 December 2004 as the material before it was unsworn, was not in admissible form and no attempt had been made to obtain Visy’s version of events.
In addition to documents relating to the ACCC’s investigation of Visy, Visy sought production of documents relating to Amcor’s immunity application on the basis that they were relevant to substantive issues in the case, as well as to the credit of the particular witnesses and that the ACCC, as the “prosecutor and model litigant”, was duty bound to disclose them.
The application for legal privilege was upheld, the court finding that the relevant question being whether at the relevant time legal proceedings were reasonably anticipated by the ACCC, not whether they were reasonably anticipated by the author of a particular document.
The constitutional framework — Crown immunity
On 9 May 2007, the Federal Court held that by the conduct of the Department of Public Works, the Crown in right of the state of New South Wales was not carrying on a business for the purposes of s 2B of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act).
Justice Graham considered the authorities, including NT Power Generation Pty Ltd v Power and Water Authority (2004) ATPR ¶42-021 and ACCC v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd (2006) ATPR ¶42-128, and concluded that:
The application of principles of Crown immunity under the TP Act is currently being considered by the High Court pursuant to the ACCC’s appeal of findings by the Full Federal Court that Baxter Healthcare was protected from the operation of the TP Act in its dealing with state purchasing authorities.
Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Limited (Virgin Blue) has withdrawn its notification of an access dispute with Sydney Airport Corporation Limited (SACL) under the access arbitration provisions in Pt IIIA of the Trade Practices Act 1974.
Virgin Blue lodged a written notice with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) on 22 May 2007 following negotiated commercial settlement of the dispute.
Virgin Blue notified the ACCC of an access dispute with SACL on 29 January 2007, and an arbitration related to access to the declared Airside Service began in February 2007.
Following Virgin Blue’s success in having services at Sydney airport declared, Pt IIIA allowed for arbitration by the ACCC if commercial negotiation failed.
ACCC Chairman Graeme Samuel has said that the outcome of this arbitration illustrates that Pt IIIA is working as intended, and that the regulatory framework provides a useful backdrop that supports effective commercial negotiations.
Source: ACCC Media release MR 130/07, 24 May 2007.
Competition notice — was the ACCC entitled to issue it?
On 22 December 2005, the ACCC issued Telstra with a notice under s 151AKA(10) of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) of its proposal to issue a Pt A competition notice under s 151AKA(2) of the TP Act (Consultation Notice).
On 12 April 2006, the ACCC issued Telstra with a Pt A competition notice alleging that Telstra had taken advantage of its market power with a likely effect in the retail market for any one or more of the fixed voice services (being local, fixed-to-mobile, national long distance and international calls) by preventing Telstra’s rivals from competing for “lower spend customers” in that market (Competition Notice).
Telstra commenced proceedings seeking review of the ACCC’s “decisions” to issue the Consultation Notice and the Competition Notice, and review of conduct engaged in by the ACCC for the purpose of making those decisions.
The ACCC accepted that its decision to issue a competition notice was reviewable pursuant to s 5 of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (ADJR Act) and s 39B of the Judiciary Act 1903.
Telstra submitted that the ACCC’s decision to issue the Consultation Notice depended on the exercise of a specific statutory power, and that, as it was a precondition to the issue of a Competition Notice, it had operative effect and impacted directly on Telstra’s legal rights and obligations, and was therefore reviewable under both the ADJR Act and the Judiciary Act.
As to the validity of the Consultation Notice and the Competition Notice, Telstra argued that they were invalid for uncertainty as they failed to specify the type or kind of anti-competitive conduct that has been engaged in or to identify what was to be done to avoid engaging in such conduct.
Telstra also submitted that the Competition Notice differed in substance from the Consultation Notice such that s 151AKA(10) was not satisfied and therefore, the ACCC was not entitled to issue the Competition Notice.
In addition, Telstra sought a declaration that it was entitled to reasons for the ACCC’s decision to issue the Consultation Notice under s 13(1) of the ADJR Act.
Finally, Telstra argued that s 151AKA(10) does not displace the ACCC’s obligation of natural justice or procedural fairness, and that the ACCC failed to accord Telstra procedural fairness in connection with the issue of the Consultation and Competition Notices.
In assessing whether the ACCC was entitled to issue a competition notice, the court found that the Competition Notice differed in substance from the Consultation Notice in the kind of anti-competitive conduct it described.
Accordingly, the ACCC was not entitled to issue the Competition Notice.
However, the court held that Telstra was not entitled, under s 13(1) of the ADJR Act, to reasons for the ACCC’s “decision” to issue the Consultation Notice as it was not a “decision” under s 5 of the ADJR Act.
Nor was it entitled to reasons for the ACCC’s decision to issue the Competition Notice as it was a decision within the terms of Sch 2(f) of the ADJR Act, being a decision “in connection with the institution or conduct of proceedings”.
ACCC UPDATE
Consumer policy inquiry: ACCC lodges submission
On 29 May 2007, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) lodged its submission to the Productivity Commission’s inquiry.
The ACCC’s submission provides an overview of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) and its role in fair trading and consumer protection law, and makes a number of recommendations about how the laws could be improved including:
enhancing the ACCC’s investigative tools, in particular by enabling it to issue notices to traders requiring them to provide substantiation of advertising claims and allowing it to use its existing s 155 investigation and evidence gathering powers in certain circumstances, and
The ACCC’s submission is available on the ACCC website at www.accc.gov.au.
Source: ACCC Media release MR 133/07, 29 May 2007.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) has issued a determination authorising certain general practitioners (GPs) to agree on the fees they charge their patients and to collectively negotiate with hospitals for the provision of Visiting Medical Officer (VMO) services.
In 2002, the ACCC granted authorisation to the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) for GPs intra-practice price setting arrangements.
The ACCC is satisfied that the arrangements are likely to result in a net benefit to the public.
The ACCC considers that the arrangements are likely to generate some public benefit by assisting the recruitment and retention of GPs in rural Australia; an important issue in light of current medical workforce shortages in rural Australia.
The ACCC considers that any detriments from the arrangements are likely to be limited.
The ACCC notes that public hospitals are not compelled to enter into collective bargaining arrangements with GPs and the bargaining groups are confined to single GP practices.
The ACCC has authorised the arrangements for a period of four years.
The ACCC’s determination is available from the ACCC website, www.accc.gov.au, under “Authorisations”.
Source: ACCC Media release MR 126/07, 24 May 2007.
The Trade Practices Act 1974 has been amended by the Broadcasting Legislation Amendment (Digital Radio) Act 2007 (Act 68/2007) (Digital Radio Act).
(b) immediately after the commencement of s 155AAA of the Trade Practices Act 1974
The government agency responsible for investigating anti-competitive conduct, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is principally concerned with the long-term effects of such discount programs, having received many complaints from rival supermarket and gasoline outlet chains [8].
Without reaching a definitive conclusion on whether the discounts are anti-competitive under the current law, the ACCC has entered into an "undertaking" with the supermarket chains.
Earlier this April, the Federal Court of Australia found that Woolworths had breached its undertaking to the regulator, while Coles’ scheme did not fall foul of the restrictions imposed.
Currently, the ACCC has decided to err on the side of caution by seeking to prevent speculative forms of harm.
[11] Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, ACCC Takes Action Against Coles and Woolworths for Allegedly Breaching Fuel Shopper Docket Undertakings (15 February 2014) Australian Competition and Consumer Commission http://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/accc-takes-action-against-cole...oolworths-for-allegedly-breaching-fuel-shopper-docket-undertakings.
[12] Stephen Dawson, The ACCC's 2014 Resolution to End Fuel Discounts (1 January 2014) The Drum http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-01-01/dawson-the-acccs-resolution-to-end-fuel-discounts/5181104.
[22] Ian Wylie, ‘When is bundling illegal in Australia under s 46 or s 47 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth)?’
[24] Michael Terceiro, ACCC’s investigation of Woolworths and Coles: A Blueprint for Action (19 May 2012) Consumer and Competition Protection Law http://competitionandconsumerprotectionlaw.blogspot.com.au/2012/05/acccs-investigation-of-woolworths-and.html.
Summary: This paper focuses on aspects of the application of the competition provisions of Part IV of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) (TPA) to the State,1 and in particular:
issues raised by the recent judgement in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare Pty Limited2 regarding derivative Crown immunity
High Court decision in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare
The ACCC is to grant authorisations and accept notifications
Federal Court has jurisdiction• Offences under the Competition Codes will be offences against the law of the Commonwealth
The High Court has stated that it will be harder to identify the relevant intention where an entity is established under a general enactment for the incorporation of companies8 (such as the Corporations Act or the State Owned Enterprises Act 1992).
Statutory authorities may have the immunities and privileges of the Crown for one purpose and not another, as confirmed by the High Court in Townsville Hospitals Board v Townsville City Council.9 In State Superannuation Board v Trade Practices Commission, the Federal Court held that the State Superannuation Board of Victoria was ‘not the Crown or an emanation of the Crown’ in relation to any of its functions in relation to the fund established under the Superannuation Act 1958.
The High Court found the PAWA carried on a substantial business in the sale of electricity, and used its electricity infrastructure as part of its conduct in that business.16
The High Court examined remarks in a report presented by PAWA to the Minister for Essential Services under the applicable public sector management legislation, which was required to be made public before the Legislative Assembly.
The High Court said that these were technically ‘informal’ admissions, but ‘having been made pursuant to statutory duties and in a document which there was a statutory duty to make public, they are of the utmost solemnity’.
In Braverus Maritime v Port Kembla Coal, the Federal Court applied the same approach to analyse whether the relevant statutory corporation was engaging in trade or commerce in providing pilotage services, noting:
The High Court held that this was the wrong analysis.
AGPS was a business unit of the Department, but the Federal Court considered whether in acquiring printing services from AGPS prior to the proposed sale, the Commonwealth had been carrying on a business for the purposes of s 2A of the TPA.
Purchasing authorities of the States were identified as ‘part of the executive arm’ of the relevant States in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare.22 The ACCC conceded in that case that acquisition of health care products by those purchasing authorities was not in the course of ‘carrying on a business’.23 However, in his minority judgement Kirby, J questioned whether that concession should have been made.24 It remains to be seen whether, over time, the Courts will revisit this issue.25
The High Court has said that these exceptions should be construed narrowly.Application of the Trade Practices Act to Government
In NT Power the High Court considered PAWA’s argument that its refusal to grant consent to NT Power for the use of electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure was a refusal to grant a ‘licence’ within s 2C.
The High Court found that the refusal to grant the approval sought by NT Power was not a refusal to grant a licence within the meaning of s 2C, as the permission being sought by NT Power was not a permission to sell goods or services.29
The High Court found that PAWA was in breach of s 46.
The High Court noted that PAWA had denied access to NT Power:
The High Court found that even if a s 16 direction had been given to that effect, PAWA could not rely on this.
The desire of the Minister and his advisers to establish an effective access regime to encourage genuine and efficient competition in the medium to long term did not provide immunity from s 46.32
Gasgo argued that it was part of the Crown in the right of the Northern Territory, or was entitled to derivative Crown immunity for its conduct relating to the gas supply arrangements.
The High Court found that Gasgo was not the Crown, and that it could not rely on the principle of derivative Crown immunity as the Crown was not party to the gas supply contracts,33 and no proprietary right or interest or contractual right or prerogative of Crown would be affected by granting the relief sought by NT Power.34 The High Court has since considered the issue of derivative Crown immunity in relation to the competition provisions of the TPA in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare.
High Court decision in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare
Before the introduction of s 2B of the TPA, the High Court held in Bradken Consolidated v Broken Hill Proprietary Company35 that the TPA did not apply to the Crown in the right of a State.
The High Court also held that relief was not available against other parties to a contract with the Commissioner, as if the relief sought was granted the Commissioner would be prejudiced by the operation of the TPA just as much as if the provisions had been enforced against him.36 This principle of derivative Crown immunity with respect to the TPA has since been applied in numerous cases.
In ACCC v Baxter Healthcare, the ACCC commenced proceedings in relation to conduct of Baxter Healthcare Pty Limited (Baxter) in responding to tenders issued by purchasing authorities of Western Australia, South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory, which was said to be in breach of the TPA.
The ACCC commenced proceedings against Baxter alleging Baxter:
At first instance Allsop J followed Bradken.
He found that but for the derivative immunity enjoyed by Baxter, its conduct in relation to Offer 1A would have contravened s 46, and its conduct in relation to the bundling of its offers would have been in breach of s 47 in a number of respects, as this had the purpose or the effect or was likely to have the effect of substantially lessening competition in the tendering process.
All of these findings are the subject of notice of contention which has now been remitted to the Full Federal Court for determination following the judgement of the High Court.
He concluded that the TPA did not apply to or operate in respect of the conduct of Baxter complained of, and an appeal to the full Federal Court was dismissed on the basis of the principle of derivative Crown immunity.
High Court judgment
The High Court by majority39 held that Bradken no longer expressed the law.
Following Bropho v Western Australia,40 the ultimate question in relation to the application of crown immunity:
must be whether the presumption against the Crown being bound has been rebutted, and, if it has, the extent to which it was the legislative intent that the particular Act should bind the Crown and/or those covered by the prima facie immunity of the Crown.41
The High Court affirmed that it is clear that because of s 2B of the TPA, even when the Crown is acting through a corporation as defined, or in any extended application of the Act under s 6, ss 46 and 47 (and indeed the whole of Part IV) do not apply to conduct of the Crown in the right of the State in so far as the Crown does not carry on a business.42
However, the High Court stated that:
A conclusion that, in carrying on dealings with government in the course of its own business, it enjoyed a general immunity that would not be available to the government itself when the government was carrying on a business itself would be remarkable.
The High Court held that it was not necessary to protect the legal rights of the Crown to deny that entering into or performing the contract could involve a contravention of Part IV of the TPA by a commercial party.
The High Court emphasised that when making or performing a contract is illegal for the commercial party, as a result of the application of the TPA, the result was not necessarily the general unenforceability of the contract.
The High Court indicated:
The States argued that derivative Crown immunity was necessary to preserve the unfettered contractual capacities of the Crown, noting that the conduct of Baxter in responding to the tenders had been within the contemplation of the State purchasing authorities.
The High Court rejected the argument.
Some implications of the High Court judgement
Although the conduct considered in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare was the unilateral conduct of Baxter in relation to negotiating, entering into and supplying under the purchasing authorities’ tenders, the judgement has significant implications for government purchasing and government purchasing contracts.
Notwithstanding that the High Court has upheld the principle of State Crown immunity from the competition provisions of the TPA, save to the extent s 2B applies, the decision may effectively require State governments to ensure that they comply with the requirements of Part IV of the TPA in relation to government purchasing, in addition to activities in which they are carrying on a business.
It is not clear how the decision in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare will affect contracts which have been entered into, as opposed to pre-contractual contracts.
The ACCC and third parties will be able to seek relief against the commercial party in relation to such conduct, under the various provisions which set out remedies for contravention of the TPA.
The High Court’s judgement suggests that s 4L may apply to government purchasing contracts, with the effect that the terms of the contracts are amended in ways not consistent with the original objectives of the procurement.48 S 4L provides:
In the SST Consulting Services v Rieson,49 the High Court held that where the making of a contract contravenes the TPA by reason of the inclusion of a particular provision, s 4L requires that provision to be severed from the contract.
The High Court has said that there is no requirement that the offending provision must be capable of being severed under common law rules.50 In some instances, severance within the meaning of s 4L can be achieved by a ‘blue pencil’ approach, but if not, the High Court said s 4L marks the limits of invalidity and unenforceability.51
In view of the High Court’s decision in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare, where the making of a State purchasing contract contravenes the TPA by reason of a particular provision, orders might be sought which have the effect of modifying those contracts.
The decision of the High Court in ACCC v Baxter Healthcare may affect the willingness of commercial parties to offer to supply on terms which have historically been negotiated,52 particularly where the market in which the State is acquiring goods or services is local to the State.
As the High Court noted:
Given the High Court has noted that working out the legal consequences of the different application of legislation to the State and commercial parties to such contract may be complex,54 State governments may need to consider the option of legislating or applying for authorisation of some key purchasing activities.
The High Court stated:
it must provide written notice to the ACCC within 30 days of enactment; and
(1) Any act or thing of or relating to HPV and carrying its functions or exercising its powers under this Part is authorised for the purposes of Part IV of the Trade Practices Act 1974 of the Commonwealth and the Competition Code.
Where conduct is likely to be in breach of the competition provisions, it may also be the subject of an application to the ACCC for authorisation or a notification pursuant to Part VII of the TPA.
As a result of Part 5 of the CPRA, applications for authorisation or notifications with respect to the Competition Code of Victoria must be made to the ACCC.
Authorisation or notification effectively provides immunity from proceedings brought by the ACCC or a third party with respect to conduct that would otherwise contravene the competition provisions.
Authorisation is available for all provisions in Part IV other than s 46 (but authorisation of conduct falling within other sections of the Act can effectively immunise a party from breach of s 46 in some instances), where the ACCC is satisfied that the conduct delivers a net public benefit.
Notification of exclusive dealing conduct provides immunity for potential breaches of the exclusive dealing provisions of the Act.
The immunity operates from the date a notification is validly lodged with the ACCC, or soon after in the case of notifications of third line forcing conduct and remains in force unless revoked by the ACCC.58
The ACCC has introduced a new procedure for collective bargaining notifications for the benefit of small business.
Authorisation by the ACCC is one means by which State Governments seek to ensure they comply with the TPA and the Competition Code in relation to collective purchasing arrangements.
The ACCC confirmed that the proposed collective tender process would generate some limited public benefit in administrative cost savings to health services which are likely to be directed to improving the quality of patient health care, and in enhancing the availability of nursing services through the requirement that tenderers adhere to service level targets.60
Unilateral anti-competitive conduct is regulated by section 46 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) (TPA).
The very low success rate of actions brought under section 46[1] has led many to argue that these elements are too difficult to prove and, in turn, that section 46 needs to be amended if businesses with a small share of the market are to be appropriately protected from anti-competitive conduct engaged in by their larger rivals.
The second part of the article begins with an explanation of the two main tests employed by the courts to determine whether a business has taken advantage of its market power and notes that prior to the High Court’s decision in Rural Press Ltd v ACCC [2003] HCA 75; (2003) 216 CLR 53 (Rural Press), the courts had not drawn a clear distinction between these two tests.
The ability of section 46 to effectively regulate unilateral anti-competitive conduct has been considered in two relatively recent reviews of the TPA.
This is most likely because of the number of submissions (including a detailed submission by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)) relating to the possible introduction of an effects test designed to overcome difficulties believed to be associated with establishing that a business had acted for a proscribed anti-competitive purpose.
The Dawson Committee Report does not mention the ‘market power’ requirement other than in passing and although the ‘take advantage’ requirement is mentioned, it is only discussed in the context of the requirement’s ability to safeguard against potential overreach of the effects test which the ACCC was so strongly in favour of.
However two High Court decisions handed down after the Dawson Committee submitted its report suggest that the ‘market power’ (Boral)[7] and ‘take advantage’ (Rural Press)[8] requirements pose a greater threat to the ability of section 46 to effectively regulate unilateral anti-competitive conduct.
[9] Rural Press, in which a majority of the High Court interpreted the ‘take advantage’ requirement quite narrowly, was one such case.
In June 2003, less than six months after the Dawson Committee delivered its report, the Senate Economics References Committee (Senate Committee) was asked to specifically consider whether the TPA adequately protected small businesses from anti-competitive conduct and unfair practices.
The Senate Committee noted that in Rural Press the High Court narrowed the definition of the ‘take advantage’ requirement by holding that it is not enough to show that the firm would not have been likely to act as it did if it did not possess market power.
[16] This amendment does not stem from the reports of the Dawson Committee, the Senate Committee or for that matter the recommendations of ACCC or Industry Groups.
For example, in Williams v Papersave[24] the Full Federal Court quickly dismissed the allegation that Papersave had taken advantage of its market power by taking a lease secured by a competitor on the basis that such conduct ‘could as easily have been committed by a company having little market power.’
When the issue came before the High Court for the first time in Queensland Wire,[26] the High Court held that ‘taking advantage’ of market power involved ‘use’ of that power and stressed that the words did not have moral overtones.
[33] Deane J’s approach is similar to the simple version of the Ability Test adopted by the Full Federal Court in the Papersave.
[35] The edition of Duns and Davison’s competition law case book released after Queensland Wire stated that that the High Court’s test for ‘taking advantage’ asks ‘whether the conduct in question would have occurred in a competitive market?’
The next two section 46 cases to reach the High Court also failed to draw a clear distinction between the Ability Test and the Motivation Test.
Once again, the High Court in Melway did not draw a clear distinction between the Ability Test and the Motivation Test.
In the second case, Boral, the High Court’s obiter statements about the ‘take advantage’ requirement did not indicate whether the Ability Test or the Motivation Test should be used to determine whether or not conduct involved a ‘taking advantage’ of market power.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) commenced proceedings and was able to successfully prove that Rural Press and Waikerie had breached section 45 of the TPA by reaching an agreement that had an anti-competitive purpose and effect[47] and contained an exclusionary provision.
[48] However, the ACCC was unsuccessful in its claim that Rural Press’ threats also constituted a misuse of market power, in breach of section 46 of the TPA.
Trial Judge and Full Federal Court
From the outset, it is worth noting that the Ability Test was employed by the trial judge, the Court of Appeal and the High Court (except for Kirby J).
Despite stating that this issue is resolved by asking how the business ‘would have been likely to behave’ in a competitive market[53], the Full Federal Court (FFC) also employed the Ability Test.
High Court - majority
A majority of the High Court upheld the decision of the FFC.
[58] The majority stated that to reason as the ACCC did, namely that Rural Press ‘took advantage’ of its market power because its conduct had no commercial rationale in the absence of such power, was to confound the ‘take advantage’ and ‘purpose’ requirements.
Rather, the High Court concluded that as Rural Press had chosen to protect its market power by a method not dependent on the existence of that power, it had not breached section 46.
Put simply, a majority of the High Court endorsed the FFC’s use of the Ability Test.
[65] Finally in NT Power, a decision delivered two years after Rural Press, a majority of the High Court asked a composite question to determine whether the Power Authority had taken advantage of its market power, and required the applicant to prove that the requirements of the Ability Test and the Motivation Test had been satisfied.
Thus, under the 1973 Bill, it was only necessary that anti-competitive conduct was made possible by the market power if it was alleged that market power was being leveraged into another market.
The following extract from the Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the introduction of the Trade Practices Revision Bill 1986 lends further support to the argument that the High Court’s narrow interpretation of the phrase is mandated by the legislative wording:
The above discussion suggests that the legislature made a conscious decision to include the take advantage requirement to limit the scope of section 46 in precisely the manner recognised by the High Court majority.
[82] However, as the above discussion of the parliamentary debates[83] and Explanatory Memorandum[84] demonstrates, the legislature consciously excluded certain types of anti-competitive conduct from the scope of section 46.
Although recent case law and section 46’s legislative history resolve, to a large extent, the ambiguity about what constitutes a ‘taking advantage’ of market power, they also demonstrate that the ‘take advantage requirement, correctly interpreted, creates a gap in section 46’s ability to appropriately regulate unilateral anti-competitive conduct.
Unilateral anti-competitive conduct engaged in by a corporation with market power is beyond the reach of section 46 unless that conduct was made possible, or at least materially facilitated, by that market power (in other words, unless the Ability Test is satisfied).
This is of concern because it allows businesses with market power to protect or strengthen that market power in ways that would be ineffective in the absence of market power so long as they engage in forms of anti-competitive conduct that could be engaged in by someone without market power.
[88] For example, the Government’s Response to the Senate Committee’s report does not consider, let alone justify, why it was appropriate that Rural Press escape liability under section 46 even though all members of the High Court were clearly of the opinion that its conduct was inherently anti-competitive and motivated by its market power.
Legislative change is necessary in order to ensure the take advantage requirement does not restrict section 46’s ability to effectively regulate unilateral anti-competitive conduct.
To ensure section 46 effectively regulates unilateral anti-competitive conduct engaged in by a firm with market power, the Government should reconsider its decision to reject the Senate Committee’s recommendation to amend the ‘take advantage’ requirement.
[2] Senate Economics References Committee, The effectiveness of the Trade Practices Act 1974 in protecting small business (2004) (Senate Committee Report).
This amendment was introduced to overcome concerns raised by the Full Federal Court’s judgment in Rural Press Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission [2002] FCAFC 213; (2002) 118 FCR 236.
[4] Australian Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into the Effectiveness of the Trade Practices Act 1974 in Protecting Small Business (Government Response), 6.
[8] Rural Press Ltd v ACCC [2003] HCA 75; (2003) 216 CLR 53 (Rural Press (HC)).
In the most recent High Court case involving an allegation of predatory pricing (Boral (HC), above n 7) all members of the High Court seemed well aware that they were allowed to consider Boral’s below cost pricing and its reasons for such pricing when determining whether or not Boral had substantial market power.
[19] Kathryn McMahon, 'Predatory Pricing Under Section 46 of the Trade Practices Act and the Decision in Eastern Express v General Newspapers – Part I' (1993) 1 Trade Practices Law Journal 75, 84 ; Seales, 'Predatory Pricing Revisited' (1998) 6 Trade Practices Law Journal 142; Vijaya Nagarajan, 'The Regulation of Predatory Pricing Within s 46 of the Trade Practices Act 1974' (1990) 18 Australian Business Law Review 293, 295.
[20] Geoff Edwards, 'The Perennial Problem of Predatory Pricing: A Comparison and Appraisal of Predatory Pricing Laws and Recent Predation Cases in the United States and Australia' (2002) 30 Australian Business Law Review 170, 194; Rhonda L Smith and Rachel Trindade, 'The High Court on Boral: A Return to the Past?'
[23] Some have suggested that a third approach, which focuses on the business rationale of the conduct, is emerging (see eg Margaret Brock, ‘Section 46 of the Trade Practices Act – has the High Court made a “u-turn” on taking advantage’ (2005) 33 Australian Business Law Review 327, 333 – 336).
Heerey J’s dissenting judgment in the Full Federal Court in Melway Publishing Pty Ltd [1999] FCA 664; (1999) 90 FCR 128 and his trial determination in Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Boral Ltd [1999] FCA 1318; (1999) 166 ALR 410 are cited as lending judicial support to this approach.
However, as the author agrees with Stewart’s observation that examining business rationale is simply another way of stating the Motivation Test (Ian B Stewart, ‘Taking advantage if market power in section 46 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth)’ (2005) 33 Australian Business Law Review 358), this third approach will not be examined further.
[34] It is possible that the significance of the distinction between those two approaches was not explored by the High Court because, under either test, BHP had ‘taken advantage of its market power’.
[37] S G Corones, Competition Law in Australia (4th ed, 2007) 319 states that the test adopted by the High Court for determining whether a firm has taken advantage of its market power is whether the corporation has had recourse to methods that differ from those which would apply if it were operating in a competitive market.
However, when the test adopted by the High Court in Queensland Wire is summarised later in the book (at p 321), it is suggested that both the Ability Test and the Motivation Test will need to be satisfied.
[49] All members of the Full Federal Court and the High Court accepted Mansfield J’s finding that the relevant market was the Murray Bridge newspaper market.
However, as the High Court majority did not rely on such an argument in reaching its conclusion, it will not receive further consideration.
Kirby J highlights a common criticism of the majority’s approach (see eg Frank Zumbo, ‘The High Court’s Rural Press decision: The end of s 46 as a deterrent against abuses of market power?’
The majority dealt with the ACCC’s argument that prior cases suggested that the ‘would’ test was the appropriate test very quickly by pointing to the use of the word ‘could’ by a majority of the High Court in Melway (above n 39) (see Rural Press (HC), above n 8, 76.
This approach was followed by Allsop J in Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd [2005] FCA 581; [2005] ATPR 42-066.
For example, the Government Response to the Senate Committee Report states that Rural Press is consistent with previous case law and that there is ‘nothing about the High Court’s application of ‘take advantage’ in Rural Press that suggests a narrowing of section 46’(at p 6) The language used by the Senate Committee when framing its recommendation may also have contributed to the Government’s belief that Rural Press did not narrow the application of section 46.
The ACCC alleged that Baxter had contravened the exclusive dealing and misuse of market power provisions of the Act by using the market power it enjoyed in relation to sterile fluids to effectively compel the SPAs to enter into exclusive supply contracts including the PD products
Application of the Act (derivative Crown immunity)
It was conceded by the ACCC that the SPAs were not ‘carrying on a business’ for purposes of the Act and therefore had Crown immunity from Part IV.
The issue then became whether Baxter benefited from ‘derivative’ Crown immunity in its dealings with these authorities.
At first instance and on appeal to the Full Court, it was held that they did benefit from derivative immunity (based on the earlier High Court decision in Bradken v Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd (1979) 145 CLR 107).
The majority of the High Court held that parties did not benefit from derivative Crown immunity when dealing with Crown authorities.
The majority of the Full Federal Court held that Baxter had contravened s 47; in particular, it had the purpose and effect of substantially lessening competition.
The matter first came before Justice Allsop in the Federal Court.
The Act did not apply to Baxter's conduct because they had the benefit of derivative Crown immunity
The ACCC appealed to the Full Federal Court.
The Court dismissed the appeal, agreeing with the Primary Judge that Baxter benefited from derivative Crown immunity.
The Court did not consider the other grounds of appeal (the ss 46 and 47 claims)
The ACCC appealed to the High Court on the issue of immunity
The majority of the High Court (Justice Callinan dissenting) upheld the appeal, finding Baxter did not benefit from derivative Crown immunity.
They remitted the matter to the Full Federal Court to consider the ss 46 and 47 claims.
Federal Court (First Instance; Justice Allsop)
Justice Allsop held that Baxter benefited from derivative Crown immunity and that, as a result, the Act did not apply to their conduct.
[581] The separate operation of the element of taking advantage of the substantial degree of market power has been stressed by the High Court.
[595] When one appreciates that there was no attempt to analyse the item-by-item prices by reference to costs (by either Baxter or the ACCC), or by reference to what might be a monopoly pricing or otherwise, beyond the difference between the bundled prices and the item-by-item prices, it is difficult to draw specific and particular conclusions about the item-by-item costs.
The relevant time period in which to judge or assess the competitive process will depend on all the circumstances of the case, including the structure of the industry and the asserted anti-competitive conduct.
[628] The word "substantial" has the sense of being meaningful or relevant to the "competitive process": Rural Press v ACCC at 229, 220 and 249 ,[41], [2] and [108]; citing French J in Stirling at 40,732.
See also Rural Press v ACCC at [41] and ftnt 26 for the proposition that it is not sufficient for liability merely because the relevant effect was quantitatively more than insignificant or not insubstantial.
Full Federal Court
The Full Federal Court agreed with the primary Judge that Baxter benefited from derivative Crown immunity and therefore did not consider the substance of the s 46 and s 47 claims (see below the Court's discussion following remission from High Court)
High Court
The issue for the High Court was whether Baxter benefited from derivative crown immunity; in particular, whether ss 46 and 47 applied to their dealings with a State or Territory government where the government's conduct was not in the course of carrying on a business and was therefore not subject to the Act (s 2B).
The appeal was allowed and the matter remitted to the Full Court of the Federal Court
The majority held that the Federal Court erred in finding that derivative Crown immunity protected Baxter in this case and upheld the appeal.
Agreed with the majority that the appeal should be upheld.
Justice Callinan dissented, holding that Bradken remained as authority covering this case with the result that he would have dismissed the appeal.
Full Federal Court (on remission from High Court)
Both the ACCC and Baxter appealed on this point; the former because Justice Allsop concluded that only one of the agreements satisfied this element.
ACCC sought to advance a case based upon an ongoing course of conduct over many years.
As ACCC submitted, it is only a short step from finding that a commercial undertaking has acted repeatedly in a way which is capable of producing a particular result to finding that it has the purpose of producing that result.
Federal Court (Penalty Decision)
Costs - Baxter Healthcare to pay the ACCC costs of proceedings 'at first instance and on appeal to the Full Court, other than the costs of the hearing as to whether pecuniary penalties should be imposed' (for which submissions were to be made)
Yesterday, the High Court handed down its decision in the case of Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Limited & Others [2007] HCA 38.
This special Alert discusses the implications that arise for government and business as a consequence of the Court’s decision to qualify the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity and apply Part IV of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth).
On 29 August 2007, the High Court held that Baxter Healthcare Pty Limited (Baxter) was bound by sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices Act - even when dealing with government entities which were not bound by the Act.
As a result, the question of breach has been remitted to the Full Federal Court.
In reaching its conclusion the High Court held that an earlier decision of Bradken Consolidated Ltd v Broken Hill Co Ltd (1979) CLR 107 (Bradken) was no longer authoritative law on the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity.
At first instance it was held that Baxter would have breached sections 46 (misuse of market power) and 47 (exclusive dealing) of the Trade Practices Act had it not been protected by the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity.
The appeal did not require the Court to decide whether contracts between Baxter and the relevant government authorities were enforceable.
ACCC submissions
Importantly the ACCC had accepted that the tender and procurement of sterile fluid products by the purchasing authorities did amount to carrying on a business.
The ACCC argued that Baxter negotiated, contracted and supplied the purchasing authorities on the basis that they could either purchase separate line items and incur a substantial financial penalty, or contract on a long-term bundled exclusive basis and enjoy a substantial cost saving.
The ACCC contended that by linking competitive products to monopoly products, Baxter was able to supply both products on a non-competitive basis.
Federal Court finding - anti-competitive conduct
Derivative Crown immunity - at trial and on appeal
Baxter had contended that the principle of derivative Crown immunity applied and that the Trade Practices Act could not bind Baxter in connection with the offer to supply sterile fluid products as it would damage the freedom of the Crown to enter into contracts of its choosing.
The trial judge and the Full Court of the Federal Court considered the circumstances in Baxter sufficiently similar to the 1979 High Court decision of Bradken Consolidated Ltd v Broken Hill Co Ltd to be bound by the earlier ruling.
In Bradken the majority of the High Court determined that unless a statute expressly or by implication binds the Crown, the Crown is immune from the operation of the Act (that is, Crown immunity), and the Act does not apply to corporations with which the Crown deals, where the application would interfere with the proprietary, contractual and/or other legal interests of the Crown (that is, derivative Crown immunity).
At the time the appeal was initiated the appellant had asked the Court to make orders preventing the C of R from engaging in certain conduct.
It was conceded on appeal that the Act did not apply to the C of R in connection with the performance of the contract, as a consequence of the doctrine of Crown immunity.
Bradken did not require the High Court to decide whether the Act applied to the corporations who were party to the contract with the C of R.
High Court ruling
In Baxter the High Court substantially qualified the circumstances where a corporation will be immune from liability under the Trade Practices Act in its dealings with government departments and agencies.
In a joint judgment of five members of the Court, it was agreed that sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices Act applied to Baxter and that Baxter would be liable for penalties, injunctions and other sanctions (assuming the trial judge’s findings of anti-competitive conduct are not overturned by the Full Court when those issues are dealt with on remittal).
The Bradken decision overstated the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity.
The Bradken decision did not compel the Federal Court and the Full Court of the Federal Court to reach their decision in the way they had.
Justice Kirby went substantially further than the joint judgment finding that the concept of Crown immunity was out of date and did not apply to government institutions created under the umbrella of the Commonwealth Constitution.
Justice Kirby gave some indication that a form of government immunity exists under the Constitution and that the proper approach required Courts to examine the purpose of the legislation and determine whether there was any scope for the operation of governmental immunity.
In his minority decision, Justice Callinan held that any restriction on the Crown’s freedom to contract fell within rule set out in Bradken and that the lower Court had properly applied the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity.
The High Court ruling introduces a further level of complexity to government procurement.
Yesterday, the High Court handed down its decision in the case of Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Limited & Others [2007] HCA 38.
This special Alert discusses the implications that arise for government and business as a consequence of the Court's decision to qualify the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity and apply Part IV of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth).
On 29 August 2007, the High Court held that Baxter Healthcare Pty Limited (Baxter) was bound by sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices Act - even when dealing with government entities which were not bound by the Act.
As a result, the question of breach has been remitted to the Full Federal Court.
In reaching its conclusion the High Court held that an earlier decision of Bradken Consolidated Ltd v Broken Hill Co Ltd (1979) CLR 107 (Bradken) was no longer authoritative law on the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity.
At first instance it was held that Baxter would have breached sections 46 (misuse of market power) and 47 (exclusive dealing) of the Trade Practices Act had it not been protected by the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity.
The appeal did not require the Court to decide whether contracts between Baxter and the relevant government authorities were enforceable.
The Federal Court's decision to fine Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd $4.9 million for breaches of the misuse of market power and exclusive dealing provisions of the Trade Practices Act 1974 is a warning to any company which bundles products or services together (Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd [2010] FCA 929).
In 2008, the Full Federal Court found that Baxter had breached sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices Act.
The ACCC sought a penalty of $27.3 million.
Justice Mansfield concluded that $4.9 million was an appropriate penalty, although as he also ordered Baxter to pay the ACCC's costs of the proceedings at first instance and on appeal to the Full Court, the ultimate cost to Baxter will be significantly higher.
