Death of Ian Tomlinson

Video of police assault on Ian Tomlinson, who died at the London G20 protest
Video of police assault on Ian Tomlinson, who died at the London G20 protest
Key events surrounding and following the death of the newspaper seller during the G20 protests in London in 2009
1 April A man dies during the G20 protests in central London.
7 April Video footage obtained by the Guardian shows Tomlinson was attacked from behind and thrown to the ground by a baton–wielding police officer in riot gear.
Freddy Patel, the pathologist whose initial examination suggested that Tomlinson died of a heart attack, is removed from the Home Office register of accredited forensic pathologists pending an inquiry.
The IPCC completes its investigation and asks the Crown Prosecution Service to consider whether the police officer who attacked Tomlinson should be charged with manslaughter.
Tomlinson’s family join 50 supporters in central London for a vigil to mark the first anniversary of his death on the spot where he died.
27 July: The Metropolitan police say PC Simon Harwood is to face disciplinary action for gross misconduct.
3 May: The inquest rules that Tomlinson was unlawfully killed by Harwood.
18 June: The trial begins and witnesses say they believe Tomlinson was “not posing any threat” when he was struck down by the police officer.
17 September: Harwood is found guilty of gross misconduct and dismissed from the police force.
The Tomlinson family say they were disappointed with the panel’s decision not to investigate whether the police officer’s actions led to Tomlinson’s death.
5 August: The Metropolitan police issue an apology to Tomlinson’s family and admit for the first time that he was unlawfully killed by Harwood.
PC Simon Harwood sacked over death of Ian Tomlinson
PC Simon Harwood, the police officer cleared of killing newspaper vendor Ian Tomlinson during the G20 riots, has been sacked after being found guilty of gross misconduct by a disciplinary panel.
The 45-year-old had admitted striking Mr Tomlinson with his baton and pushing him to the ground during the riots near the Royal Exchange Buildings in the City of London on April 1 2009.
Today a police panel found that he had breached professional standards through discreditable conduct and use of force, constituting gross misconduct.
He will now be sacked from the force and has accepted he will never be employed as a police officer again.
Simon Harwood's mother-in-law blames 'drunk vendor' 21 Sep 2012
But Mr Tomlinson's family stormed out of the hearing dismissing it as a "whitewash" after the panel said it did not need to consider whether PC Tomlinson's actions had contributed to the newspaper vendor's death.
PC Harwood struck Mr Tomlinson as the newspaper vendor was making his way home from work.
The father of nine, who was an alcoholic and had slept rough for a number of years, managed to walk 75 yards before he collapsed and later died from internal bleeding.
Harwood, from Carshalton in Surrey, has already been acquitted of Mr Tomlinson's manslaughter, although an inquest found the father-of-nine was unlawfully killed.
Addressing the disciplinary panel, Patrick Gibbs QC, for Harwood said: ''Pc Harwood does indeed accept that the discredit which his actions, and the way in which they have been reported, has brought upon the Metropolitan Police Service amounts to gross misconduct.
He was accused of unlawful arrest, abuse of authority and discreditable conduct over an incident when he allegedly shouted at another driver and knocked him over his car door, before announcing that he was a police officer and arresting the motorist on a common assault charge.
Later, Harwood rejoined the force as a civilian worker before becoming a police officer for Surrey.
First, in the case of the mysterious death of English newspaper vendor Ian Tomlinson during the 2009 G-20 summit protests.
After the incident, most of the press stuck to the police account that Tomlinson had died of a heart attack while walking home from work.
It showed a police officer beating the news vendor with a baton after no apparent provocation.
Something similar happened with the death of Jimmy Mubenga, an Angolan detainee who died while being deported from Heathrow on 12 October 2010.
One of the side effects of the research project "Reading the riots" conducted by the Guardian together with the London School of Economics in the year that followed the protests, was to throw light on the way in which rumours spread and were countered when false.
“In many cases – explains Lewis – like when news spread that some animals escaped from London zoo, it was the same kind of people that sent false information that helped to clarify it”.
Widow and son of 47-year-old newspaper seller who died after being hit by policeman at G20 protests speak of their anger and frustration
The family of Ian Tomlinson, who collapsed after being hit by an officer at the G20 protests in London, have accused the police of engaging in a cover-up to stop them finding out the truth.
They said they felt they had been pressured by the City of London police, Scotland Yard and the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) not to speak out, but could no longer keep quiet because of their concerns.
Telling the family he had "died of a heart attack", police made no mention of significant injuries found on Tomlinson's body.
Family members now believe the injuries were caused by a police officer who struck him and pushed him to ground.
Tomlinson, a 47-year-old newspaper seller, collapsed and died near the Bank of England at around 7.25pm on 1 April, moments after the attack by an officer in the Metropolitan police's Territorial Support Group (TSG).
"There were two police officers standing there and they asked to speak to Sam, my eldest daughter.
And they said: 'Your husband was caught up in the G20 riots, and he suddenly collapsed and died of a heart attack."
Police then refused to allow her to see his body in the Royal London Hospital, she added.
They also disclosed that, when a post-mortem examination was completed three days after Tomlinson died, police gave them an edited version of the results.
"Now we know that it wasn't a heart attack ... that he died of internal bleeding."
Keir Starmer QC, the Director of Public Prosecutions, announced today that no charges will be brought in relation to the death of Ian Tomlinson at the 'G20 protests' in London on 1 April 2009.
This case concerns the tragic death of Mr Ian Tomlinson on 1 April 2009.
Shortly before his death, Mr Tomlinson was struck with a baton and pushed very strongly in the back by a police officer, who will be referred to in this explanatory note as PC 'A', causing him to fall to the ground.
On 1 April 2009 a summit of financiers, bankers and leaders of industrial countries took place in central London.
In the weeks leading up to the event in London there was a great deal of media coverage about possible disruption.
There were reports that over 30 police officers suffered injury during the events of the day and the CCTV and other video footage shows a degree of violence from time to time, which appears to have become more serious as the day progressed.
Royal Exchange runs between Threadneedle Street and Cornhill and, in order to ensure that demonstrators did not get back behind police lines by using Royal Exchange, police officers were instructed to clear pedestrians from that area.
Mr Tomlinson had no connection with the demonstration on 1 April 2009.
He can be seen on CCTV pictures at various points in the area approaching police officers, and at one stage being moved by police officers because he was standing in the way of a police vehicle.
At about 7.15pm, a senior police officer gave an order for officers to form a cordon and move people from the junction with Threadneedle Street out onto Cornhill.
There were approximately 20 police officers in the cordon and they included six City of London police dog handlers.
PC 'A', who was behind the dog handler, moved forward and using his baton struck Mr Tomlinson on the left thigh.
He was seen by members of the public to walk up the street and then appeared to bump into a building and slowly collapsed to the floor.
Police and paramedics gave him first aid and sought to resuscitate him in the street and on the way to hospital but, regrettably, they were unsuccessful and Mr Tomlinson died.
At the time of those acts, Mr Tomlinson did not pose a threat to PC 'A' or any other police officer.
This Charging Standard was applied in another incident arising from the G20 where a police officer had struck the complainant twice with his baton.
The offence of misconduct in public office cannot simply be used as a substitute for other offences and simply being a police officer who commits a criminal offence, even one of assault, does not, without some other aggravating factor, automatically amount to the offence of misconduct in public office.
“Today’s apology and admission by the Metropolitan Police that their officer unlawfully killed Ian marks the end of our campaign and legal case.
We knew that Ian had been unlawfully killed by the officer as soon as we saw the video, but we had to first go through the long legal process of taking apart untruthful accounts given by PC Harwood and other police officers.
It will always be painful for us that Ian died so violently, but at least he is at rest now, and the force has publicly acknowledged the truth.
Don't matter alcoholic or not- he died as a result of injuries caused by being assaulted by a police officer.
Death at G20 UK newspaper coverage of the G20 demonstrations (1 April 2009) and the death of Ian Tomlinson.
Presentation on theme: "Death at G20 UK newspaper coverage of the G20 demonstrations (1 April 2009) and the death of Ian Tomlinson."
Death at G20 UK newspaper coverage of the G20 demonstrations (1 April 2009) and the death of Ian Tomlinson
Activity: Initial reports of Tomlinson's death I'll give out five different newspaper reports of the death of Ian Tomlinson at the G2o demonstrations in London.
Activity: Initial reports of Tomlinson's death The reports: http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/top-stories/2009/04/02/man-dies-in-g20-protests-115875-21247134/ http://www.independent.ie/world-news/europe/man-dies-after-being-caught-among-the-mob-in-city-riots-1696746.html http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1166819/Pictured-The-man-died-G20-violence-returned-home-work.html http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/apr/02/g20-summit-protester-death
EVENING STANDARD: “Police came under a barrage of missiles as they tried to save the life of a man who collapsed during the G20 protests in the City.
MIRROR: “As police officers tried in vain to revive the man they were pelted with bottles by a screaming mob.
http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/apr/09/g20-police-assault-ian-tomlinson-g20 Incidentally, the initial Guardian report was more sceptical of the official version than the other four: “Jackson said Mr Tomlison was then surrounded by police officers who were pelted with at least one missile.
Excellent summary from the Guardian: http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/apr/07/civil-liberties-g20-police-assault-ian- tomlinson Tabloid hysteria before the demonstration: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1166409/JAMES-SLACK-Batten-hatches--bad-old-days-riots-back.html Tabloid reaction to the ”riots”: http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article2354088.ece Tabloid ”exposé” of anarchists and environmentalists: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1166549/Undercover-anarchist-mob-How-Mail-infiltrated-group-heart- violence.html Early reports of death: http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/top-stories/2009/04/02/man-dies-in-g20-protests-115875-21247134/ http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1166819/Pictured-The-man-died-G20-violence-returned-home-work.html http://www.independent.ie/world-news/europe/man-dies-after-being-caught-among-the-mob-in-city-riots- 1696746.html http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/apr/02/g20-summit-protester-death Video of police assault: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HECMVdl-9SQ Guardian report of Harvie Brown case: http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/jun/11/g20-protester-harvie-brown-cleared References
Download "Death at G20 UK newspaper coverage of the G20 demonstrations (1 April 2009) and the death of Ian Tomlinson."
The 47-year old newspaper vendor was on his way home from work, when PC Simon Harwood of the Metropolitan Police, an officer with previous allegations of excessive force on his record, struck Tomlinson from behind with a baton, then proceeded to shove the man to the ground, minutes after which he died of internal injuries.
The case of corruption and the unlawful death of Ian Tomlinson is by no means the first major allegation of corruption within the Metropolitan Police, the enormous police service which serves Greater London with the exception of the very core, which is the jurisdiction of the City of London Police.
In chapter 5, entitled “The UK: London, miscarriages of justice and Northern Ireland”, Punch investigates the history of the Metropolitan Police and their constantly shifting image in the eye of the public.
The origins of the Metropolitan Police lie in the 1829 formation of the New Police of the Metropolis, intended from the outset to be a solution to the corruption problems within the previous patchwork system of police forces in London.
It was seen as vital in the eyes of the Home Secretary at the time that the public perception of the London police force was quite positive, which at the time it was indeed (Punch 126).
The coercive actions of one police officer, which in a past century would not have become well publicized, are now available for millions to view online.
This month, the October of 2011, Simon Harwood pleaded not guilty to charges of manslaughter; his trial will commence in the summer of 2012 (Malik).
The singer died when his home was raided by the police — after stabbing himself, they said.
Ian Tomlinson (7 February 1962–1 April 2009).
the Newspaper vendor had not meant to get caught up in the G20 protests in the City of London, but was struck and knocked over by a police officer, and died of a heart attack.
26 September 2006, Nigerian businessman Frank Ogburu cried out “I can’t breathe,” as four police officers piled on top of him, one standing with his foot on Ogburu’s neck.
Later the police telephoned his wife, Christy in Lagos to explain that he had died.
22 July 2005, Jean Charles de Menezes, 28, a Brazilian electrician living in Tulse Hill was shot and killed at Stockwell tube station on the London Underground by Metropolitan Police officers.
30 April 2005, Azelle Rodney, shot dead by the Metropolitan Police in Edgware, West London.
7 September 2003, Michael Powell, 38, died after being arrested by police in Lozell’s, Birmingham.
1 April 1998 Christopher Alder, 37, a former paratrooper, died after being arrested by Hull police; dragged to the station; placed on floor face down and handcuffed.
In June 2002 a judge ordered the jury to clear five police officers charged with manslaughter and misconduct in public office charges because of conflicting evidence on how he died.
16 March 1996, Ibrahim Sey, 29, died after being sprayed (while handcuffed) with CS spray in Ilford police station, Inquest verdict: unlawful killing.
5 December 1995 Wayne Douglas, 25, died in Brixton police station after being detained in a stop and search operation.
8 May 1995, Brian Douglas, 33, died eight days after being restrained with new batons by Clapham police officers, Inquest verdict: Misadventure
February 1995, David Ewin, shot dead by police in his car in South London.
16 December 1994, Oluwashiji Lapite, 34, a Nigerian asylum-seeker, died during a struggle with police officers from Stoke Newington police station.
6 October 1985, Cynthia Jarrett, 49, died of a heart attack during a police raid on her home in Thorpe Road, Tottenham.
13 July 1981, Winston Rose, 27, died in police van after being restrained by police officers taking him to psychiatric hospital.
15 June 1974, Kevin Gately, 21, a Warwick University mathematics student, was killed by a police blow to the head during an Anti Nazi demonstration, in Red Lion Square, London.
A police officer who hit Ian Tomlinson with a baton and pushed him to the ground at the G20 protests has been found not guilty of manslaughter.
PC Simon Harwood, 45, of south London, denied the manslaughter, in April 2009, of Mr Tomlinson, 47, on the grounds that he used reasonable force.
Mr Tomlinson, was pushed as he walked away from a police line in the City of London.
He later collapsed and died.
During the trial, the police officer had accepted he was "wrong" to have hit and pushed Mr Tomlinson.
Father-of-nine Mr Tomlinson, a heavy drinker who had slept rough for a number of years, walked 75 yards before he collapsed.
Deborah Glass, deputy chairwoman of the Independent Police Complaints Commission, said after the verdict "significant questions" remained over PC Harwood's actions on 1 April 2009.
