Murder of Joanna Yeates

Was former Cheltenham student Joanna Yeates strangled with her own sock?
Police are investigating whether Bristol murder victim Joanna Yeates could have been strangled with her own ski sock – which her killer might then have kept as a trophy.
The landscape architect’s snow-covered body was found on Christmas morning missing one of her grey, knee-length socks, and detectives believe the garment may hold the key to solving her murder.
The 25-year-old former Cheltenham student – last seen alive nearly three weeks ago – was not wearing her coat or boots either but those items were recovered from her flat in Canynge Road, Clifton, Bristol.
The detective said he was “keeping an open mind” about whether the killer or killers could be keeping the sock as some sort of trophy or whether Miss Yeates was strangled with it.
Mr Jones also confirmed that the killer or killers may have tried to put Miss Yeates’s body over a wall into the quarry on Longwood Lane, Failand, North Somerset, but instead left her on the grass verge.
This morning uniformed police officers were searching drains in the streets surrounding Joanna Yeates’s flat.
Joanna Yeates killer Vincent Tabak now a convicted sex offender after admitting possessing child pornography on his laptop
Joanna Yeates killer Vincent Tabak now a convicted sex offender after admitting possessing child pornography on his laptop
The 37-year-old is serving a life sentence for the murder of Joanna Yeates
The man serving a life sentence for the murder of Joanna Yeates in 2010 has been found guilty of a string of sex offences after police found more than 100 images of child pornography on his laptop.
Vincent Tabak was jailed in 2011 after strangling Miss Yeates and dumping her body in the snow on the outskirts of Bristol.
Guilty plea: Joanna Yeates's killer Vincent Tabak had admitted four counts of posessing child pornography after images were found on a laptop.
A judge rejected his argument, jailing him for 10 months at Bristol Crown Court, where he was found guilt of murder four years ago.
In 2011, at the same court house, Tabak was convicted of killing 25-year-old Joanna Yeates after becoming obsessed with her.
After spurning his advances Miss Yeates was killed and dumped by the side of the road in Failand on the outskirts of the city.
'Vincent Tabak is a dangerous, calculating and manipulative offender who is already serving a life sentence for the murder of Joanna Yeates.
'Joanna's murder was a shocking and terrible crime which had a significant impact on the whole of the Bristol community and I hope this latest conviction will ensure her killer is unable to cause any further harm.'
Joanna Yeates: The innocent woman murdered by her neighbour
It was just an ordinary night out with colleagues for Joanna Yeates, 25.
At 8pm on 17 December 2010, the landscape architect left the pub for home.
Then, on Christmas Day, her body was discovered on the outskirts of Bristol.
She’d been strangled and suffered 43 injuries.
He said he’d strangled Jo when she’d screamed after he’d put his arm around her, misreading what she thought was a flirty comment.
Joanna Yeates' killer Vincent Tabak contacted prostitutes in Newcastle
TWISTED killer Vincent Tabak was jailed for life today after being convicted of murdering Joanna Yeates for sexual thrills.
TWISTED killer Vincent Tabak was jailed for life today after being convicted of murdering Joanna Yeates for sexual thrills.
He strangled Miss Yeates after becoming obsessed with violent sex and pornography, it can now be revealed.
Just two weeks before murdering the landscape architect he also paid for sex with a prostitute during a business trip to Los Angeles, police discovered.
Dutchman Tabak, 33, throttled Miss Yeates in a violent confrontation at her flat in Clifton, Bristol, on December 17 last year.
Within an hour he had dumped her partially-clothed body in the foetal position on a snowy verge in Failand, near Bristol.
But he began to slip up - changing his story over and over again as more evidence emerged as to his guilt - answering "I can’t remember“ more than 80 times to difficult questions during his three-week trial at Bristol Crown Court.
On the night of her death, she had told landscape architect colleagues over Christmas drinks how she was dreading being without Mr Reardon for the weekend.
And after a massive police hunt and nationwide media coverage, dog walkers found her frozen corpse dumped on a verge in a lane in Failand, North Somerset, on Christmas Day.
Joanna Yeates murder:man, 32, arrested
Detectives today arrested a 32-year-old man on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
Detectives today arrested a 32-year-old man on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
Soon afterwards specialist search teams moved into the neighbouring flat to where Miss Yeates lived at 44 Canynge Road in Clifton, Bristol.
The arrest was the second to be made by detectives since Miss Yeates’s frozen body was found dumped in a lane on the outskirts of Bristol on Christmas Day.
Her boyfriend Greg Reardon, 27, reported her missing after he returned to Bristol on December 19 following a weekend away visiting family in Sheffield.
A huge police operation swung into action after her body was found on a verge in Longwood Lane, Failand, North Somerset.
The reconstruction focused on what she did after she left her firm, BDP, in Bristol city centre.
She went first to the Bristol Ram pub on Park Street, where she spent around two hours with colleagues.
This is how events have unfolded following the disappearance of 25-year-old landscape architect Joanna Yeates from Bristol:
Mr Reardon reports Miss Yeates missing when he returns to Bristol from a weekend away visiting relatives in Sheffield.
Avon and Somerset Police make their first appeal for information, saying they are concerned for her safety because it is out of character for her to go missing.
Specialist officers search the couple’s flat, as well as the snowy Bristol Downs and Avon Gorge.
A couple walking their dogs in the Failand area of North Somerset, three miles from where Miss Yeates went missing, find a body.
Police arrest Mr Jefferies on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
Police reveal they are investigating whether Miss Yeates could have been strangled with her own ski sock – which her killer might then have kept as a trophy.
Meanwhile, detectives said that tests revealed she did not eat the Tesco Finest pizza she was seen buying on her way home just before she went missing.
'The Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies' -ITV drama about Joanna Yeates
She went missing on December 17 and her body was found on Christmas Day.
The Joanna Yeates Case
At 8pm 25-year-old landscape architect Joanna Yeates, leaves the Bristol Ram pub in Park Street, Bristol and walks the 20 minutes to her home in Canynge Road.
At 9am a local couple walking their dog discover a woman’s body lying in a roadside verge off Longwood Lane, Failand.
Police believe the woman to be Joanna Yeates.
However due to her frozen body the post-mortem examination will take longer to complete.
Joanna Yeates’ family visit the location where her body was found.
Police reveal that Joanna Yeates was strangled.
Police arrest Chris Jefferies at his flat on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
Joanna Yeates' family and her boyfriend issue a statement paying tribute to their “beautiful and talented daughter”, who was “stolen from us”.
Police launch a Facebook campaign to find Joanna Yeates' killer.
Detectives issue a statement revealing that Joanna Yeates’ body was missing one grey ski sock when her body was discovered.
The final steps of Joanna Yeates are reconstructed for the BBC's Crimewatch programme.
Police charge 32-year-old Dutch national Vincent Tabak with Joanna Yeates' murder.
Joanna Yeates’ body is released to her family.
Tabak appears at Bristol Crown Court via a video link from HMP Long Lartin in Worcestershire.
The funeral of Joanna Yeates takes place in St Mark's Church, Ampfield, Hampshire.
At the Old Bailey Tabak admits the manslaughter of Joanna Yeates but denies murder.
Joanna Yeates and the Christmas Murder
Joanna Yeates’ was an attractive, young blonde and a landscape architect.
yeatesYeates went missing from Bristol, England on December 17 after being out with friends and her body was found on December 25, 2010.
The murder inquiry, codenamed Operation Braid, was one of the largest police investigations ever undertaken in the Bristol area.
On 25 December 2010, a fully clothed body was found in the snow by a couple walking their dogs along Longwood Lane near a golf course and next to the entrance of a quarry in Failand, approximately 3 miles from her home.
A post-mortem examination began on 26 December 2010, though results were delayed due to the frozen condition of the body.
The post-mortem indicated that she had died “… several days before being discovered” on 25 December 2010.
On 28 October 2011, Tabak was found guilty of Joanna Yeates’ murder by a 10 to 2 majority verdict.
Joanna Yeates: Murder at Christmas Part 1
Exclusive documentary examining the shocking murder of Bristol landscape architect Joanna Yeates, who was strangled in her flat in December 2010.
Joanna Yeates funeral held in Hampshire village where she grew up
Family and friends of the murdered landscape architect Joanna Yeates have attended her funeral in the village where she grew up.
The ceremony to commemorate the life of the 25-year-old was held at St Mark's in Ampfield, Hampshire, known as the church in the woods.
Next came Yeates's brother, Chris, and behind him her boyfriend, Greg Reardon, with whom she lived in Bristol.
Before the service they released a new photograph of Yeates, whose body was found on Christmas morning, eight days after she vanished following drinks with work colleagues in Bristol.
The university will remember Yeates through an annual landscape design prize sponsored by BDP, her employer in Bristol.
Joanna Yeates murder: the full truth may never be known
But after Joanna Yeates's frozen body was discovered on a snowy roadside verge on Christmas morning, it became a huge murder hunt and a story that gripped the UK and international media.
The solution to the mystery turned out to be simple: the 25-year-old landscape architect was killed by her neighbour, the Dutch-born engineer Vincent Tabak.
To the torment of her loved ones, however, the truth about exactly what happened on the night of 17 December last year in Flat one, 44 Canynge Road, Bristol, may never be known.
She vanished eight days before Christmas after leaving the Ram pub on Park Street in Bristol, where she had been enjoying after-work drinks with work colleagues.
Tabak and Morson, the daughter of a Harvard-educated lawyer, then left Bristol to spend Christmas in Cambridge at her parents' home.
On Christmas morning, at about the time Tabak and Morson – who remained ignorant of her boyfriend's crime – were opening their gifts, Yeates's body was found by a dog walker, covered in leaves and a pile of snow next to a quarry wall at Longwood Lane, Failand, three miles from Clifton.
On 30 December, Tabak and Morson watched a television news report of the arrest of Joanna Yeates's landlord, the former public school teacher Christopher Jefferies, over the killing.
But the DNA evidence was damning and 30 days after killing Joanna Yeates, Vincent Tabak appeared before Bristol magistrates charged with her murder.
The police deny they were slow in getting to Tabak, saying he left the Bristol area before Yeates' body was found.
Of course, in the end, the death of Joanna Yeates and the continuing agony her family must suffer partly because so much remains unclear is down to Vincent Tabak.
If he is playing a game, it is a cruel one for those who were closest to Joanna Yeates.
