Ex parte Crow Dog

1883: Ex Parte Crow Dog
Crow Dog, a Brule Sioux Indian, was sentenced to death by a Dakota Territory court after he shot and killed fellow Brule Sioux Spotted Tail (pictured left) in 1881 on their reservation.
But Crow Dog, believing that he had already made amends by Sioux traditions — agreeing to provide support for Spotted Tail's dependents and overseen by a tribal council — appeals the Territory's decision to the Supreme Court.
In response to the Crow Dog decision, Congress passes the Major Crimes Act, enumerating seven crimes over which federal courts would have exclusive jurisdiction on Indian land.
Crow Dog Case (1883)
Crow Dog, his rifle and horse
The Ex Parte Crow Dog case, heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1883, illustrates how federal Indian law works in several ways.
In brief, the case involved a Brule Sioux man named Crow Dog, a traditionalist and a captain of the tribal police force.
Crow Dog shot and killed a man called Spotted Tail who was viewed as an accommodator and great peace chief by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), but also known to have a bad temper.
There are various explanations of why Crow Dog killed Spotted Tail, but many mention issues over power struggles and a woman named Light in the Lodge.
The Tribe handled the case in its traditional way, and made Crow Dog pay restitution of $600, 8 horses, and one blanket which was a significant payment in those days, to take care of Spotted Tail’s family.
The Dakota Court sentenced Crow Dog to hang for the murder.
The case was appealed to the United State Supreme Court which found that unless Congress authorized it, the government did not have jurisdiction over a crime committed by one Indian on a reservation against another, so Crow Dog was set free.
Crow Dog’s Case: American Indian Sovereignty, Tribal Law, and United States Law in the Nineteenth Century (Studies in North American Indian History) By Sidney L. Harring p. 107 Publisher: Cambridge University Press (February 25, 1994) Language: English ISBN 0-521-46715-2
Ex Parte Crow Dog
Ex Parte Crow Dog (1883) is a Supreme Court case decision that ruled that federal courts did not have authority over crimes committed by one American Indian against another on reservation treaty lands that were governed by language referring to acts committed by "bad men among the Indians."
Crow Dog (c.1835-1910) was a Lakota Sioux leader.
In 1881, he killed a Lakota Sioux chief, Spotted Tail.
Crow Dog paid the family the peace offering dictated by the Lakota tribal council: $600 (the equivalent of approximately $12,800 today), 8 horses, and a blanket.
Despite this, he was tried for murder by the Dakota Territory Court and found guilty (the Territory Supreme Court upheld the verdict).
Ex Parte Crow Dog
Crow Dog argued that the federal court didn't have jurisdiction to try him.
A writ of habeas corpus was issued, releasing Crow Dog.
In response to the decision for Ex Parte Crow Dog, the United States Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in 1885.
Crow Dog later became a spiritual leader among the Sioux, helping to popularize the Ghost Dance.
One of his descendants, Leonard Crow Dog, was also a spiritual leader during the Occupation of Wounded Knee.
Justia.com has the entire ruling of Ex Parte Crow Dog
Transkript von Ex Parte Crow Dog
Ex Parte Crow Dog
Did the federal government have the right to sentence Crow Dog to death for a crime committed against another Native American on their reservation?
Kan-gi-Shun-ca (Crow Dog) shot and killed another Native American (Spotted Tail) on the Great Sioux Reservation in present-day South Dakota.
The government of the Dakota Territory charged Crow Dog with murder and sentenced him to be hanged.
Crow Dog appeals decision under
Crow Dog: federal court lacked jurisdiction, pointing to an 1834 act that specifically excluded crimes committed by one Native American on another from federal jurisdiction
Crow Dog
In response to this Court's decision in Ex parte Crow Dog, 109 U. S. 556, 109 U. S. 571 (1883), which held that there was no federal jurisdiction over an Indian who murdered another member of his tribe, Congress passed the Major Crimes Act, 23 Stat.
Presaging this Court's holding in Ex parte Crow Dog, 109 U. S. 556 (1883), by a few months, the Attorney General concluded that there was no federal jurisdiction over the crime because it fell within the Indian-against-Indian exception.
Given the proximity of this incident to the Crow Dog incident, it is implausible to conclude that Congress did not consider the situation of intertribal crimes when passing the Major Crimes Act.
These cases—Ex parte Crow Dog, 109 U.S. 556 (1883); United States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375 (1886); and Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, 187 U.S. 553 (1903)—explored the outer boundaries of congressional and executive power over Indian affairs, Indian lands, and even Indian lives—almost always without the consent of Indian people or Indian nations.
The legal import of this isolation came to the forefront in Crow Dog and Kagama.
In Crow Dog, leaders from the Sicangu band of Lakota Indians were conflicted over whether to concede additional lands and resources to the United States.
Crow Dog, the leader of the group opposed to the concession, allegedly murdered Spotted Tail, the proponent of the concession.
Federal officials wanted to prosecute Crow Dog under federal law, but the Supreme Court held that no federal statute or Indian treaty expressly authorized federal criminal jurisdiction over an Indian-on-Indian crime on Indian lands.
1883 - Ex Parte Crow Dog
In August 1881, Crow Dog, “belonging to” the Brule Sioux Band, killed Spotted Tail, who signed the treaty of 1868 as the principal Chief of the Brule Sioux.
Crow Dog was convicted of murder by the district court of Dakota territory, and sentenced to death.
In November 1883 the U.S. Supreme Court heard arguments on writs of habeas corpus and certiorari filed on behalf of Crow Dog.
In the case Ex Parte Crow Dog, decided December 1883, the Supreme Court reversed the territorial court decision, and ruled that, “the First District Court of Dakota is without jurisdiction to find or try an indictment for murder committed by one Indian upon another in the Indian country, and a conviction and sentence upon such indictment are void, and imprisonment thereon is illegal.”
The Supreme Court’s decision in Ex Parte Crow Dog includes a fine-grained analysis of the jurisdiction of the district courts of the Territory of Dakota, sections of the revised U.S. statutes pertaining to “crimes arising within the maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States,” the provisions of the treaty of April 29th, 1868 and an agreement with “certain bands of the Sioux Indians, &c.” approved by Congress February 28th, 1877.
To avoid further bloodshed, the families of Spotted Tail and Crow Dog agreed on a settlement: Crow Dog gave Spotted Tail's family fifty dollars, eight horses, and a blanket to "cover" the crime.
Crow Dog was tried for murder in the territorial court at Deadwood, South Dakota.
Court officials, knowing that no white man would walk several hundred miles in a blizzard to be executed, were certain Crow Dog would not appear.
On schedule Crow Dog emerged from the blizzard to surrender himself to the authorities.
The lawyers argued that because he had killed Spotted Tail on a reservation, Crow Dog was subject to tribal, not United States, law.
In Ex Parte Crow Dog (exparte is Latin for "on behalf of"), the Supreme Court upheld this argument and ruled that the Dakota territorial court was without jurisdiction.
Cross Bear Lakota Sioux.
Lakota Sioux, medicine man, he carried a shield of buffalo hide into battle
Ex Parte Crow Dog - Significance, An Orderly Government, Impact, The Indian Civil Rights Act
Crow Dog of the Sioux Indian Nation
Upheld Crow Dog's claim and overturned the lower court's decision sentencing him to death for a murder.
Harring, Sidney L. Crow Dog's Case: American Indian Sovereignty, Tribal Law, and United States Law in the Nineteenth Century.
Ex Parte Crow Dog - Significance
Ex Parte Crow Dog - An Orderly Government
Crow Dog, whose Indian name was Kan-gi-Shun-ca, and Spotted Tail, also known as Sin-ta-ge-le-Scka, were members of the Brule Sioux Band of the Sioux Nation.
Crow Dog, at odds with Spotted Tail over several personal and public matters, shot and killed him in August of 1881.
Through application of traditional Sioux law, the families settled the matter by Crow Dog's family paying restitution to the v…
Ex Parte Crow Dog - Impact
The Crow Dog decision represented to many an extreme application of the doctrine of tribal sovereignty and self-government.
The law essentially overturned the Crow Dog decision by identifying seven crimes on Indian lands over which federal courts would assume jurisdiction, including murder.
Ex Parte Crow Dog - The Indian Civil Rights Act
This battle occurred when General George Armstrong Custer and the Seventh Cavalry were involved in a campaign to forcibly place the Lakota Sioux onto a reservation.
1883 - Ex Parte Crow Dog Supreme Court decision.
Crow Dog, a Sioux Indian who shot an killed an Indian on the Rosebud Reservation, was prosecuted in federal court, found guilty, and sentenced to death.
The Court ruled that the US did not have jurisdiction and that Crow Dog must be released.
They were prosecuted and found guilty by the federal government.
December 17, 2015 This Day in History	Ex parte Crow Dog, Major Crimes Act of 1885
On this day in history, January 17, 1883, the U.S. Supreme Court issued its ruling in Ex Parte v. Crow Dog, a significant decision siding in favor of tribal court sovereignty.
In 1881, Crow Dog, a member of the Brulé band of the Lakota Sioux, shot and killed Spotted Tail, a Lakota chief.
Regardless of the motives, the tribal council dealt with it according to tradition; Crow Dog paid restitution to the dead man’s family ($600, eight horses and a blanket).
Unsatisfied with that result, federal authorities assumed authority and prosecuted Crow Dog for murder in  Deadwood, South Dakota.
Crow Dog was found guilty and sentenced to hang.
Crow Dog was therefore released.
Ex parte Crow Dog case brief summary
Ex parte Crow Dog,
This was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a federal court did not have jurisdiction to try Crow Dog, a Native American (Indian) who killed another Indian on the reservation when the offense had been tried by the tribal council.
The tribe handled it according to Sioux tradition, and Crow Dog paid restitution.
The United States government then tried Crow Dog for murder, and he was sentenced to hang.
Crow Dog murdered Spotted Tail on Reservation.
Crow Dog’s family pays restitution, per tradition, to Spotted Tail’s family.
Federal court convicted Crow Dog of murder and SCOTUS reversed.
Crow Dog
Chief Crow Dog
Crow Dog (also K?a?gí Šú?ka; 1833 – 1912) was a Brulé Lakota subchief, born at Horse Stealing Creek, Montana Territory.
Crow Dog was one of the leaders who helped popularize the Ghost Dance.
On August 5, 1881, after a long simmering feud, Crow Dog shot and killed principal chief Chief Spotted Tail (who was also at the Grattan massacre), on the Rosebud Indian Reservation.
In 1883, writs of habeas corpus and certiorari were filed on his behalf by lawyers who volunteered to represent him pro bono, his case was argued in November 1883 before the U.S. Supreme Court in Ex parte Crow Dog.
In response to the ruling in Ex parte Crow Dog, the U.S. Congress passed the Major Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1153) in 1885.
Ex Parte Crow Dog 109 U.S. 556 (1883)
Ex Parte Crow Dog, 109 U.S. 556 (1883)
Ex Parte Crow Dog
In Ex Parte Crow Dog (109 U.S. 556 (1883)), the Court overturned the conviction in federal court of an Indian who had murdered another Indian in Indian country.
The Court's reaffirmation of tribal sovereignty in Crow Dog was in large measure responsible for passage of the Major Crimes Act by Congress in 1885 (18 U.S.C. 1153).
In 1883 the U.S. Supreme Court rendered a decision in Ex Parte Crow Dog that reaffirmed a basic promise of federal law as it dealt with the Native American nations: that these nations are political sovereigns and have a right to be ruled by their own law in their own land.
Nevertheless, Ex Parte Crow Dog remains a foundational case for the tradition of legal pluralism that is today manifested in the laws and institutions of Native American sovereigns.
On the afternoon of August 5, 1881, Kangi Sunka (Crow Dog) shot and killed Sinte Gleska (Spotted Tail) on a road in the Rosebud Indian Agency on the Great Sioux Reservation in Dakota Territory.
Crow Dog had ridden with Crazy Horse yet also served several terms as a BIA-appointed chief of Brule police.
Nevertheless, in contravention of prior policy that had honored Native American self-government, Henry Lelar, the acting agent at Rosebud, ordered the arrest of Crow Dog.
Crow Dog's trial in federal court, Dakota Territory, was tainted by strong anti-Indian prejudice.
The lead prosecution witness, Agent John Cook, was in Chicago when the killing occurred, but he testified to Crow Dog's political animosity.
Crow Dog, ably represented by attorney A. J. Plowman, was allowed to present his claim of self-defense, but Pretty Camp, his wife and an eyewitness, was not allowed to testify.
The claim of federal jurisdiction, the legal power to make and apply law for Indian-to-Indian matters within Indian Country, is the crux of the matter, and the conviction and death sentence given Crow Dog brought the issue to the Supreme Court.
By writ of habeas corpus Crow Dog urged the Supreme Court to deny federal jurisdiction in the matter.
Crow Dog was granted his release.
Crow Dog returned to the Rosebud Agency.
Yet Ex Parte Crow Dog was tainted by racism.
Two years after Ex Parte Crow Dog Congress passed the Major Crimes Act of 1885.
Harring, Sidney L. Crow Dog's Case.
