Report of 1800

James Madison, Report on the Virginia Resolutions
The secret author of Virginia Resolutions was James Madison, while the Kentucky Resolutions were secretly written by Thomas Jefferson.
In January 1800, the Virginia General Assembly passed the "Report of 1800", a document by Madison affirming the principles of the Resolutions and responding to criticism they had received.
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison secretly collaborated in writing different resolutions of protest.
Gutzman, K. R. Constantine, "'O, What a Tangled Web We Weave ...': James Madison and the Compound Republic," Continuity 22 (1998), 19-29, by conservative scholar
Gutzman, Kevin R., "A Troublesome Legacy: James Madison and the 'Principles of '98,'" Journal of the Early Republic 15 (1995), 569-89 , by conservative scholar
James Madison himself, considered the father of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, wrote in The Virginia Report, 1800, by the Virginia House of Delegates, that the Sedition Act was unconstitutional, according toe Leonard Levy.
Nonetheless, James Madison went to work on a set of amendments that enumerated specific rights, but did not mean that rights not enumerated were not valid.JAMES MADISON The first of these, and considered by many the most important is the First Amendment to the Constitution.
James Madison Rebukes Nullification Deniers
James Madison, Father of Our Constitution, opposed nullification.
Their assertions contradict our Declaration of Independence, The Federalist Papers, our federal Constitution, and what James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, and Alexander Hamilton really said.
James Madison says in Federalist No. 45 (9th para):
James Madison commented on the above:
In 1798, Thomas Jefferson wrote The Kentucky Resolutions, and James Madison wrote The Virginia Resolutions.
That James Madison opposed Nullification by States of Unconstitutional Acts of the Federal Government.
Matthew Spalding (Heritage Foundation) and David Barton (Wallbuilders) cite South Carolina’s Nullification Crisis of 1832 as “proof” that James Madison “vehemently opposed” nullification.
Something is rotten in the Cato Institute:  Robert A. Levy, Chairman of the Cato Institute, recently wrote an article published in the New York Times,  “The Limits of Nullification“, where Levy regurgitates the same fabrication Randy Barnett told to the effect that Madison said in his Report of 1800, that all the States can do is express their opinion that a federal law is unconstitutional.
2 James Madison, Notes on Nullification (1834).
Opposition to them resulted in the highly controversial Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, authored by James Madison and Thomas Jefferson.
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison also secretly drafted the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions denouncing the federal legislation, though many other state legislatures strongly opposed these resolutions.
Whenever the idea of nullification comes up we inevitably hear about Thomas Jefferson’s Kentucky Resolution and James Madison’s Virginia Resolution.
James Madison (1751-1836)
Young MadisonBorn March 16, 1751, the eldest son of the wealthiest landholder in Orange County, Virginia, James Madison was destined for a life of privilege and responsibility.
James MadisonIn 1785, Madison was appointed a delegate to a convention on interstate trade to be held in Annapolis in September 1786.
He was elected and undertook their defense by producing the Report of 1800, a comprehensive attack on the unconstitutionality of the two acts as well as a ringing statement of the inviolability of the right of free speech.
James MadisonAs secretary of state, Madison was charged with a host of duties besides the conduct of American foreign policy, ranging from publishing and distributing the public laws to serving as liaison between the federal government and the governors of the states and territories.
The Second Bank of the United States was established by Madison's signature in 1816, but in one of his last official acts he vetoed as unconstitutional a Bonus Bill that provided for federal support of roads and canals.
James Madison’s Biography
Born on March 16, 1751 at his grandmother’s home in Port Conway, Virginia, James Madison was the eldest of the twelve children of James Madison Sr. and Nelly Conway Madison.
In the 1799-1800 session, Madison served in the House of Delegates where he wrote his Report of 1800, a defense of the Virginia Resolutions.
Madison’s retirement years were occupied with organizing and editing his papers from the 1787 Constitutional Convention, keeping up correspondence, and receiving the many visitors who journeyed to meet the Father of the Constitution.
James Madison died at Montpelier on June 28, 1836.
Interposition and the Heresy of Nullification: James Madison and the Exercise of Sovereign Constitutional Powers
Proponents of this doctrine invoke the authority of James Madison to defend the claim that the Constitution empowers states to nullify laws passed by Congress.
American politics today provides a good example of this practice, particularly in the invocation of the doctrine of nullification and secession as legitimate constitutional options supposedly sanctioned in the thought of such Founders as James Madison.
James Madison described each of these options as “the several constitutional modes of interposition by the States against abuses of powers.”
Madison’s Report of 1800
Like Madison’s Report of 1800 for Virginia’s legislature, South Carolina’s Exposition focused attention on the power of the national government.
A final, at times reluctant, participant was James Madison, in retirement at Montpelier.
Calhoun found just such proof for his theory in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions and Madison’s Report of 1800.
’” This heritage alone ensured that the doctrine, like Madison’s Report of 1800, would “last as long as the Constitution itself.”
The sovereigns envisioned by Webster and Calhoun were each different from the sovereign recognized by the Constitution’s founder, James Madison.
“[T]he plural term States,” Madison noted of his Report of 1800, “was invariably used in reference” to actions taken by states and not by a single state.
Virginia “should re-assert in the most emphatic terms our Resolutions of ’99,” especially James Madison’s 3rd Resolution, which proclaimed “the right of the States to judge and interpose for arresting” potential constitutional “evil” while “declaring at the same time, that the South Carolina doctrine is an illegitimate and dangerous inference from this resolution.”
ARTICLE: James Madison's Celebrated Report of 1800: The Transformation of the Tenth Amendment
As James Madison put it:
