Dietrich v The Queen

It concerned the nature of rights to a fair trial and under what circumstances indigent defendants should be provided legal aid by the state.
Transkript von Copy of Dietrich v The Queen
Dietrich v The Queen is important Background Information On the 17th of December 1986, Olaf Dietrich was found with around 70 grams of heroin when he tried to fly from Bangkok, Thailand to Australia Melbourne.
Human Rights denied In the Dietrich v The Queen case some human rights were denied.
The judges that had different opinions in the Dietrich v The Queen trial were justice Deane and justice guadron's opinions and Justice Brennan and Justice Dawson's opinion.
The High Court in Dietrich v The Queen (1992) 177 CLR 292 at 302 describes the disadvantages facing a self-represented accused.
Stay of proceeding: even if a self-represented accused is aware of his or her right to make an application for an adjournment or stay of the proceedings to enable legal representation to be obtained, the trial judge should consider whether the trial is likely to be unfair if the accused is forced to proceed unrepresented: Dietrich v The Queen (1992) 177 CLR 292.
Where a self-represented accused, “who through no fault on his or her part, is unable to obtain legal representation” and is facing trial for serious offences, a trial judge has power to make an order staying the proceedings if, in the circumstances of the case, it appears that the accused would otherwise not receive a fair trial: Dietrich v The Queen at 315.
1992 – The High Court of Australia rules in Dietrich v The Queen that although there is no absolute right to have publicly funded counsel, in most circumstances a judge should grant any request for an adjournment or stay when an accused is unrepresented.
To mark our 40th anniversary, The College of Law recently ran a survey asking for your view on the top 10 most influential High Court of Australia cases over the last 40 years.
Pictured: Waiting outside the No 1 Court, High Court of Australia, to commence final argument in Mabo (No 2): L to R: G McIntyre (solicitor), Ron Castan QC, Eddie Mabo, Bryan Keon-Cohen (counsel), May 1991.
As he was legally defined as a stateless person and could therefore not be returned to his country of origin, the High Court of Australia ruled by majority that Al-Kateb could be detained indefinitely, and that indefinite detention of a stateless person was lawful.
The case, which saw the Federal and Tasmanian governments clashing heads in the High Court of Australia, involved the proposed construction of a hydroelectric dam on the World Heritage-listed Gordon River in south-west Tasmania.
The High Court of Australia, on which I serve, has long paid great respect to the opinions of the International Court of Justice as expositions of the principles of international law where those principles have arisen for consideration in Australian cases.
Following, as it did, the decision of the High Court of Australia in Mabo , nobody questioned the relevance of a consideration by the Court of applicable or relevant international human rights principles in assisting it to come to its conclusions about the content of Australian common law.
I have previously collected a number of decisions of the High Court of Australia and of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in which reference had been made to international human rights principles in the development of the understanding of the local common law in Australia 36 .
An appeal by a convicted contemnor involving an asserted denial of his right to have his conviction and sentence reviewed by a higher tribunal according to law as article 14.5 of the ICCPR requires, when all that was provided was an entitlement to seek special leave from the High Court of Australia to appeal against conviction 43 .
A previous decision of the High Court of Australia had held that they were exempt 49 .
However, in a recent comment, Sir Anthony Mason has remarked that the approach adopted by me "is entirely consistent with the principles of statutory construction adopted in Coco v The Queen 51 and it shares something in common with the use of international law and conventions as a source for development of the common law, as expounded by [Justice] Brennan in Mabo [No 2] 52 and subsequently by other Justices in Dietrich v The Queen 53 and [ Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs] v Teoh 54 ".
The recent exposition by the High Court of Australia of fundamental rights to be implied from the nature and purposes of the Australian Constitution has sometimes been criticised on this ground 63 .
2 	Justice of the High Court of Australia.
18 	See also Dietrich v The Queen (1992) 177 CLR 292, 330, 337, 365.
cf G Triggs, "Customary International Law and Australian Law" in M P Ellinghaus, A J Bradbrooke & A J Duggan (eds) The Emergence of Australian Law (Sydney: Butterworths, 1989) 376, 381; B F Fitzgerald, "International Human Rights and the High Court of Australia" (1994) 1 JCU L Rev 78.
The High Court of Australia warned against "judicial development ... as a backdoor means of importing an unincorporated convention into Australian law" ibid 288, per Mason CJ and Deane J.
65 	Eg Dietrich v The Queen, supra n 16 per Brennan J, at 323.
Friday, 13 November 1992
Have a look at the old newspapers from 13 November 1992 and get them!
Get a FREE Numerology report based on the digits of 13 November 1992!
Which were the important events of Friday, 13 November 1992 ?
The High Court of Australia rules in Dietrich v The Queen that although there is no absolute right to have publicly funded counsel, in most circumstances a judge should grant any request for an adjournment or stay when an accused is unrepresented.
CD and DVD cards from 13 November 1992 to enjoy the time of your life
Tell the world why Friday, 13 November 1992 is such a special date for you!
Dietrich v The Queen
Dietrich v The Queen [1982] HCA 57
He appealed to the High Court of Australia.
Dietrich v The Queen
Case decided in the high court of Australia on 13 November 1992.
4.6 In November 1992, a majority of the High Court, in Dietrich v The Queen, [1] decided that where an indigent defendant [2] is charged with a serious criminal offence and, through no fault of his or her own, is unrepresented, a trial judge should normally grant a stay or an adjournment if the accused requests one.
[3] Dietrich v The Queen (1992) 177 CLR 292, p. 311.
[4] Dietrich v The Queen (1992) 177 CLR 292, p. 315.
