Ashford v Thornton

—Abraham Thornton.
But in England, so long was this bloody, superstitious humbug kept up, that any hardened scoundrel who was a good hand at his weapon might, down to the year 1819, absolutely have committed murder under the protection of English law.
Two years before that date, a country “rough” named Abraham Thornton,[1] murdered his sweetheart, Mary Ashford, but by deficiency of proof was acquitted on trial.
On this, poor William Ashford, who was but a boy, declined the combat by reason of his youth, and the prisoner was discharged, and walked in triumph out of court, the innocent blood still unavenged upon his hands.
If it was then found perfectly well, the accused was acquitted; if not, he was found guilty.
“Balance of evidence overwhelmingly in favor of the prisoner,” said the sapient justice (in Dutch I suppose,) and finding him innocent in a ratio of six to one, he discharged him at once.
Barbara Forrest and Mary Ashford
But amateur sleuths uncovered a series of bizarre coincidences with another murder of a young woman Mary Ashford more than a century and half earlier suggesting history had a chilling habit of repeating itself in the most brutal fashion.
But seven days into his trial Thornton was acquitted when Mr Justice Croom-Johnson directed the jury to return a not guilty, ruling the evidence against him was nothing more than circumstantial.
Amazingly, exactly 157 years earlier on Whit Monday in 1817, Birmingham witnessed the murder of Mary Ashford.
Both were returning from dances.
And a man was acquitted of Mary’s murder was named ... Thornton.
PRETTY Mary Ashford was probably considered the belle of the parish.
After a day at work, she and her friend Hannah Cox went to the highlight of their social year, the big dance at the Tyburn House Inn.
Lying submerged in the dirty water was Mary Ashford.
It was known that during the evening before, Mary had been in the company of 25-year-old farmer and builder Abraham Thornton, from Castle Bromwich, and a special constable was sworn in to arrest Thornton.
If he won the fight, he would be acquitted.
As for Mary, she lies in Sutton Coldfield churchyard under a gravestone with the now illegible inscription: “As a warning to female virtue and a humble monument to female chastity this stone marks the grave of Mary Ashford who on the twentieth year of her age having incautiously repaired to a scene of amusement without proper protection was brutally murdered on 27th May 1817.”
On a private appeal against an acquittal for murder, in Ashford v Thornton (1818), Thornton, who was accused of murdering the appellant’s sister, claimed the right to trial by battle.
Barbara Forest, Abraham Thornton and Mary Ashford: does murder repeat itself?
On 27 May 1817, the body of a murder victim - 20-year-old Mary Ashford was found in a flooded sandpit at Erdington, a village lying five miles outside of Birmingham in England.
As a police archivist officer read through the Ashford murder of 1817 he shook his head in disbelief.
Whit Monday had been on 26 May both in 1817 and 1975 - the year of the Barbara Forrest murder.
Both girls had visited their best friend on the evening of the Whit Monday to change into a new dress for a local dance party.
After each murder a suspect was arrested whose name was Thornton, and in both instances, this Mr Thornton was charged with murder but subsequently acquitted.
At 6.30 a.m. on 27 May, 1817, a labourer on his way to work in Erdington came upon a heap of bloodstained clothes belonging to a woman, near to Penn's Mill.
The pit was searched and the corpse of a well-known and well-loved local girl named Mary Ashford was recovered.
Then she and her friend - Hannah Cox - would go to the Whitsuntide dance at the Tyburn House Inn in the evening.
She changed into the new dress and then went to the dance with Hannah, and the two girls seemed to have enjoyed themselves, and they'd had no shortage of male admirers, although for a majority of the evening, Mary had been in the company of a young bricklayer named Abraham Thornton, while her friend had been dancing with a boy named Benjamin Carter.
The dance ended around midnight, and the foursome headed towards their respective homes as far as a place known as the Old Cuckoo, which lay just a short distance from Erdington village.
Later on, about 3.30 a.m., Mary Ashford was seen walking towards the home of Hannah Cox's mother.
She told Hannah she was going home then said goodbye to her friend and left the house at 4 a.m. On two more occasions that morning Mary Ashford was seen.
Not long after these inquiries into Mary Ashford's last movements, the police interviewed Abraham Thornton, who seemed in a state of shock after being told that Mary had been murdered, probably by strangulation - after being raped.
The police continued their investigation into the murder of Mary Ashford, but came up against a brick wall.
No one had seen the murder victim and Abraham Thornton together after they had been sighted at the stile at the top of Bell Lane at three in the morning, a fact which provided the police with a real headache.
Hundreds of people who believed Thornton had killed Mary Ashford had waited outside the courthouse from six in the morning.
In modern English law, that verdict would have been final but in the early 19th century an ancient law existed which enabled Mary Ashford's brother William to appeal against the jury's verdict and thus demand a second trial.
This was duly done and upon 17 November 1817, Abraham Thornton once again stood in the dock, this time before Lord Ellenborough at the Court of the King's Bench.
By now, interest in the Mary Ashford murder had reached fever pitch in every corner of Britain, and the Fleet Street news hounds were delighted at a dramatic turn in the case.
This signified a challenge to William Ashford for a fight to the death, unless one of them surrendered or was incapacitated during the fight.
Abraham Thornton held what resembled a heavy leather mitten with a trailing feather attached, and invoked the ancient English law.
William Ashford's counsel disputed Thornton's right to Trail by Battel and criticised Lord Ellenborough for allowing such an alternative to a proper second trial, but the protestations came to nothing.
Because William Ashford had not responded to Abraham Thornton's challenge by 21 April in the following year, the latter was thoroughly discharged.
He would no longer have to stand trial for Mary Ashford's murder, but because of the adverse publicity, no one would employ the bricklayer, so he later emigrated to the United States.
To this day, criminologists have tried in vain to determine who murdered Mary Ashford.
Her facial features bore an almost identical similarity to Mary Ashford, and like Mary, Barbara had also been strangled after being raped.
Like the Thornton who stood accused of murdering Mary Ashford in 1817, Michael Thornton was tried for the murder of Barbara Forrest, and he too was later acquitted.
Both murders had taken place around the same time of day, and, furthermore, both victims had been to a friend's house to change into a new dress before going out on the evening of Whit Monday to a dance.
The week before Mary Ashford was murdered, she told Hannah Cox's mother that she had 'bad feelings about the week to come', but was unable to elaborate on her unfounded sense of dread, and ten days before Barbara Forrest was raped and then strangled to death, she told a colleague at work of a strange premonition.
Mary Ashford, age 20, was found dead at the bottom of a water-filled pit.
Nonetheless, the local authorities believed that 24 year-old Abraham Thornton was to blame for her death.
But this happened in 1817 in Great Britain.
This runs afoul against current prohibitions regarding double jeopardy (among other things), but that wasn’t the law in England in 1817.
and tossed another on the ground toward William Ashford’s feet.
Thornton was invoking his right to a trial by battle, a custom stemming from the Normans nearly a millennium earlier.
And while trial by battle (also called “trial by comabt”) disappeared almost entirely (in Europe, at least) by the 16th century — humanity concluded that incorporeal beings tend not to meddle in the affairs with mere mortals, at least not in cases like these — Parliament never got around to actually revoking the law.
William Ashford was no match for the much larger Thornton, so he declined the challenge.
As for the right to a trial by battle in Great Britain, Parliament removed it a year after the Ashford court ruled.
It arose in response to the 1817 case of Ashford v. Thornton.
Mr. Thornton was charged with the murder of Mary Ashford.
The two had attended the same dance and were seen leaving together.
After a short trial, Mr. Thornton was acquitted after witnesses stated they saw him after 4:00a.m in a different part of the city from where the body was discovered.
Mr. Thornton responded by requesting trial by battle.
After an exchange of applications on the validity of this legal maneuver (during which, presumably, the gauntlet remained on the floor) the Court ruled that Mr. Ashford could either allow for Mr. Thornton’s release or meet him in battle as the right to trial by battle had never been extinguished by statute.
During the break in the hearing, I went across the street to the law library to look up an interesting decision I had heard about that was recently made by the King's Bench over in England: William Ashford vs. Abraham Thornton, decided April 16, 1818.
There was widespread public dissatisfaction when Thornton was acquitted by the jury.
[Abraham Thornton] appeared before Lord [Chief Justice] Ellenborough and three other judges.
On this day in history in 1817, the last challenge to trial by battle took place.
The challenge of trial by battle was the extraordinary denouement of the legal case of Ashford versus Thornton.
On the morning of May 27th 1817, Mary Ashford’s body was recovered from a pond in a field near Erdingham, Warwickshire.
Murder was suspected, the man in the frame being Abraham Thornton.
The previous night, Mary had attended a dance at a local hostelry and had danced with Thornton, several times.
Mary’s brother William Ashford was enraged at the verdict.
Council for the defendant explained to the court that Thornton was willing to undergo trial by battle, a fight with oak clubs, with his accuser.
Thornton was granted trial by battle but Ashford was but a teenager and frail of body and could not engage in the battle.
Upon this ruling, Parliament hastily reassembled and repealed the right to trial by battle.
It certainly wasn't the case for Abraham Thornton, when, in 1818, he was accused for the second time for the murder of Mary Ashford.
Abraham Thornton was 24 years old, a heavy-set, healthy man.
On the 26th of May, 1817, he attended a party (a feast and dance) at The Three Tuns, a public house in Warwickshire, England, where he happened to notice a young woman named Mary Ashford.
Mary Ashford was 20 years old, and worked as a housekeeper for her uncle in Warwickshire, England.
The next morning, Mary's body was found drowned in a water-filled pit.
At that time it was possible, if a defendant was acquitted, for an individual to bring a private appeal to court, and prosecute again.
This is exactly what Mary's brother, William Ashford did.
In 1817, after Abraham Thornton was found not guilty of the rape and murder of Mary Ashford, Mary's brother William took the case back to court, where Thornton demanded a Trial by Combat.
William Ashford, seeing the writing on the wall, decided not to go through with it, and Thornton walked free again.
I’m studying Ivanhoe right now, and I came across some interesting articles about the book and its connection to a real-life trial by combat… in 1817.
The Ashford v. Thornton case of 1817 was the last case of a trial by combat challenge in Britain.
Details of the Ashford v. Thornton case (1817)
In 1817 Abraham Thornton was accused of raping and murdering 20-year-old Mary Ashford.
Mary’s brother, William Ashford, was allowed by English law to make an “appeal,” such that Thornton was called upon again to plead his innocence.
The public at the time was shocked, given that it was the first demand for a trial by battle since 1638.
William Ashford, who actually was trying to defend a woman, was out of luck (being a skinny teenager, and all).
[1] I saw part of this quotation originally in Mark Schoenfield’s article, and he cites it as 9 August 1817.
In the year 1817 a tragedy occurred within the borders of Erdington, which made the area the talk of the country.
On the evening of Whit Monday, May 27th 1817, a dance took place at the old Tyburn Inn, which was attended by the lads and lasses of the farms and countryside.
Among them was an attractive named Mary Ashford, daughter of a small farmer living between Walmley and Sutton.
Soon after midnight she left the the Tyburn House with a young farmer named Abraham Thornton, of Castle Bromwich.
He had paid her much attention at the dance, and had been heard to express sinister designs upon her chastity.
He was committed for trial, but was finally acquitted following a statement giving him an alibi.
Then Mary Ashford's brother William Ashford, took out a private summons against Thornton and a fresh trial began.
"An immense crowd assembled in the Court of King's Bench on Monday morning, under the expectation that Thornton would be tried.
William Ashford then took his station in the Court.
Following his acquittal, Abraham Thornton went to America, the Yentonians and neighbours of Erdington made it too unpleasant for him to remain in the area in comfort.
where Mary Ashford attended the dance
THE SCENE OF THE MURDER Penns Lane 1817 by Samuel Lines
Photographed by the Sir Benjamin Stone fromthe Stone Collection... The Mary Ashford Pit at Penns Lane where Mary's body was found in 1817.
To the public at the time it was the culmination of the investigation and prosecution of Abraham Thornton for the murder of Mary Ashford, a case so remarkable that according to contemporary reports it was talked about "not only in the cottage, but in the drawingroom, among companies consisting of both sexes."
In the parish of Sutton Coldfield, on May 27, 1817 at seven o'clock in the morning, the body of the twenty year old Mary Ashford was pulled from a pit of water.
According to witnesses, she had, only the night before been present at a dance in the forebodingly named Tyburn House, and also at that dance had been a certain Abraham Thornton.
Apparently to this end convinced her to dance and at around midnight they left together.
The horrible nature of the crime, and the puritan and virginal character of Mary Ashford became the talk of the gossip columns throughout the country.
over the Remains of Mary Ashford,
on the 27th of May, 1817,
Abraham Thornton was not a sympathetic figure.
After being interviewed by the local magistrates, he charged with the murder and arraigned to the assizes at Warwick, where on August 18, 1817, he stood trial.
"Abraham Thornton ... having, on the 27th of May last, in the royal town, manor, and lordship of Sutton Coldfield, in the county of Warwick, not having the fear of God before his eyes, but being moved by the instigation of the devil, wilfully murdered Mary Ashford, by throwing her into a pit of water."
He was similarly charged with Mary Ashford's rape, and to this he also replied not guilty.
There followed a precession of witnesses, who, over the course of eight hours, established in detail that Thornton had been seen dancing with the deceased, that he had been seen leaving the pub with Mary Ashford, that she had gone to her friend's house at about five in the morning to change her dress, and had subsequently left, and that Thornton had been seen with her in the area where the body was found.
Those familiar with the Common Law will be aware of the principle of Double Jeopardy, which states that once a person is acquitted of a crime they may not be tried for it again.
However established this principle may be, in 1817 there was one older, known as the Appeal of Murder.
The murdered girl's brother, William Ashford, no doubt distressed that the man he saw as her killer had been allowed to go free, sought to avail himself of this ancient writ.
On 17 November, 1817, the trial began.
Again the charges were read to Abraham Thornton, and again, he plead not guilty, but then, on being handed a piece of paper by his counsel, continued:
The court ultimately accepted Thornton's argument and ruled that the burly, muscular bricklayer might prove his case by attempting best the "frail and dwarflike" William Ashford in a fight to the death.
Following some short formalities, Thornton was for the second time Acquitted of Mary Ashford's murder.
To retry a man once acquitted was an affront to justice, and it was considered to be right that the appellant only be allowed to do so if he were willing to stake his life on the matter.
Subsequently both the Wager of Battle, and the Appeal of Murder were struck from English law.
Sutton Coldfield was the focus of national attention in 1817 when a young woman named Mary Ashford was found murdered in the town.
She had been attending a party in Erdington on the evening of 26 May 1817,[64] and had left with Abraham Thornton and her friend Hannah Cox, who left Mary and Abraham.
Public response to the acquittal was that of outrage and a private appeal was brought against the verdict by Mary's brother, William Ashford.
Thornton threw down the other for William Ashford to pick up and thus accept the challenge, which Ashford did not do.
Sutton Coldfield has a very active arts community with numerous local amateur dramatic groups, musical theatre companies, orchestras and dance schools.
In 1817, one Abraham Thornton was charged with rape and murder of Mary Ashford but acquitted by the Jury.
The poor thing was a pretty young lady of humble gardener who went to the party with lot of enthusiasm and excitement with managed attires in ‘La Cindrella Style’ and had danced with accused and left the party with him.
Therefore, the public hue was heavily against the acquittal, Mary’s brother, William Ashford filed appeal Thornton was rearrested.
In a fully packed Kings Bench Thornton aged 22 yrs took a catchy turn, he claimed a right to trial by Battle in single combat against Appellant William Ashford.
, however obnoxious I am myself to the trial by battle, it is the mode of trial which we, in our judicial character, are bound to award.
