Gray's Inn

Britain's first black community in Elizabethan London
Walk out of Aldgate Tube and stroll around Whitechapel Road in east London today, and you'll experience the heady sights, smells and sounds of the temples, mosques and curry houses of Brick Lane - so typical of modern multicultural Britain.
But, back in Shakespeare's day, you could have met people from west Africa and even Bengal in the same London streets.
But the real change came in Elizabeth I's reign, when, through the records, we can pick up ordinary, working, black people, especially in London.
Shakespeare himself, a man fascinated by "the other", wrote several black parts - indeed, two of his greatest characters are black - and the fact that he put them into mainstream entertainment reflects the fact that they were a significant element in the population of London.
In Elizabeth's reign, the black people of London were mostly free.
Image caption London's 16th Century black community is recorded in St Boltolph's Church's records
Her area of London was notorious.
But it is at least worth noting that the authorities felt duty-bound to look after food and lodging while the freed slaves were in London.
But it cannot be, as is sometimes claimed today, that this edict applied to the many black people who, like Mary Fillis, were living as citizens in London, as they were in Bristol.
By the 18th Century, it is thought as many as 20,000 black servants lived in London.
The Inns are located in the same corner of London and provide collegiate activities and support for barristers and student barristers, including advocacy training, and the awarding of substantial scholarships to those entering the profession.
The actual buildings of Gray’s Inn are in London but those who become members join the Honourable Society of Gray’s Inn and can practise throughout the country.
Gray’s Inn has a large estate (approximately 14 acres) in Central London (WC1) which includes:
The governing body of the Inn is Pension which consists of over 300 active members, known as Masters of the Bench or Benchers.
The head of the Inn is the Treasurer, who holds this appointment for one year and each year Pension elects the Vice-Treasurer, who becomes Treasurer the following year.
The current Treasurer is Desmond Browne QC and the Vice-Treasurer is David Hunt QC, who will be Treasurer in 2016.
The Treasurer is a member but never the Chairman of this Committee.
The Treasurer - ex officio
The Vice-Treasurer – ex officio
The Under-Treasurer
As with all member-led bodies, the relationship between the members and the Under-Treasurer requires great tact and exceptionally good interpersonal skills to work effectively.
Whilst the job is essentially that of Chief Executive, with a number of other duties and responsibilities, for historical reasons the primary title of the appointment remains as the Under-Treasurer.
In basic terms, the Under-Treasurer reports to the Treasurer and the Management Committee who between them lead the activities of the Inn.
The Under-Treasurer, through senior managers, is responsible for all the staff, although he/she should recognise that committee chairmen and certain Benchers have responsibilities and will have suggestions as to how to develop their areas.
Close liaison between the Under-Treasurer and chairmen and Benchers is therefore essential.
May is the height of dining season, as hundreds of hopefuls try to cram in enough meals – held at the four inns of court in London – to enable them to be "called to the bar" upon completion of their studies in June.
In London, the average trainee is paid £25,000 per annum.
All barristers must be a member of one of the four Inns of Court (Lincolns Inn, Gray’s Inn, Middle Temple and Inner Temple) as you can only become a barrister if you have been ‘called to the bar’ by an Inn of Court.
London's Inns of Court and Inns of Chancery.
The Honourable Society of Gray's Inn
Gray's Inn (Grays Inn Road) does not claim a specific foundation date but has existed on the present site since at least 1370.
The Inns of Chancery were a group of buildings and legal institutions in London initially attached to the Inns of Court and used as offices for the clerks of chancery, from which they drew their name.
London's Museums and Art Galleries
There are many museums distributed around London; some in the centre and some on the outskirts.
the Museum of London in Barbican.
the London Transport Museum (entrance charge).
For a complete list see Museums in London
London's Old Markets
Spitalfields Market near Liverpool Street Station has been a market on the site since 1638 when Charles I of England gave a licence for flesh, fowl and roots to be sold in what was then a rural area on the eastern outskirts of London.
The existing buildings were built in 1887 to service a wholesale fruit and vegatable market, owned by the City of London Corporation, but the vegatable market has since moved to new premises.
The old Billingsgate Market building, on the north bank of the Thames between London Bridge and Tower Bridge, was originally a wholesale fish market.
London's Alleys and Lanes
London's alleys and lanes are so numerous it would be impracticable to describe them all here.
Needless to say wherever you are in Inner London there will be an alley or lane near you.
The River Thames is, of course, one of London's main features running, as it does, right through the middle of the city.
The walk along the south bank, The Queen's Walk, takes you past the London Aquarium, the London Eye, the Royal Festival Hall, the National Theatre, the Tate Modern and the Millenium Bridge, Shakespeare's Globe Theatre, and the Golden Hind.
Very near the South Bank is Southwark Cathedral and a little further on is the London Dungeon.
A short diversion will take you to the Monument which is a little north of the riverside walk then back to the riverside walk looking out for the steps up to the high level viewing platform, on past the Old Billingsgate Fish Market building and finally to the Tower of London and Tower Bridge.
Roman London
There are various Roman remains and artifacts on display in the Museum of London including a very impressive mosaic.
The Museum of London does tours of an excavation of part of a Roman fort close to the museum.
Lesser Known London
There are many locations in London that are not on the normal tourist's list.
Those places which are not well known (Hidden London) and places which very few people know about (Unknown London).
In the first group (Hidden London) there are places like the Inns of Court, Kensington Roof Gardens, Holland Park, Seven Dials, Guildhall, Leadenhall Market, Primrose Hill and The Hampstead Pergola.
In the second group (Unknown London) are places such as the 13th century Carmelite Crypt, the Golden Boy of Pye Corner, Temple of Mithras, the Watch House of St. Sepulchre's Church, the London Stone, Mason's Avenue, Gough Square, Turkish Bath House, Postman's Park, Smithfield market, St. John's Gate, Cloth Fair, Barbican Centre, Barbican Conservatory, the Clockmakers' Museum in the Guildhall and the Roman Amphitheatre in the Guildhall Art Gallery.
London's Parks and Gardens
These are the four main parks within Inner London.
St. James's Park (58 acres), Green Park (47 acres), Hyde Park (350 acres) and Regent's Park (410 acres) which encompases London Zoo.
There are numerous other parks in Greater London some of which include Kensington Gardens (275 acres), Kensington Roof Gardens (1.5 acres), Holland Park (55 acres), Kew Gardens (300 acres), Battersea Park (200 acres), Victoria Park (290 acres), Primrose Hill (50 acres), Hampstead Heath (358 acres), Greenwich Park (180 acres).
Gray’s Inn, is one of the four Inns of Court in London.
To be called to the Bar and practise as a barrister in England and Wales, an individual must belong to one of these Inns.
Gray’s Inn is located in the Holborn area of London.
In 1827 Dickens starts work as a solicitor's clerk at Gray's Inn, London
The London Gold Fix has been a regular feature of the international gold market since Friday, September 12, 1919, when the five gold pool members met for the first time, at the premises of the London merchant bank N.M. Rothschild, and with Rothschild as the chairman.
Brief History of Mocatta & Goldsmid as London Bullion Market Member
By 1670 he had taken his family to London.
In 1671 Moses Mocatta founded a bullion brokerage firm in Camomile Street in the City of London, known as Mocatta & Goldsmid after Asher Goldsmid joined in 1783.
(27 June 1907-1 November 1990) was an English judge. . . After attending Clifton College and New College, Oxford, he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1930 . . . In 1982 he served as Treasurer of the Inner Temple.
The Honourable Society of the Inner Temple, commonly known as Inner Temple, is one of the four Inns of Court (professional associations for barristers and judges) in London.
To be called to the Bar and practise as a barrister in England and Wales, an individual must belong to one of these Inns.
It is located in the wider Temple area of the capital, near the Royal Courts of Justice, and within the City of London.
It is an independent extra-parochial area,[39] historically not governed by the City of London Corporation[40] (and is today regarded as a local authority for most purposes[41]) and equally outside the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Bishop of London.
of Benedict Barnham alderman of London, s.p. Kntd.
His committee work included topics such as the punishment of rogues (12 Mar.), fines and recoveries (12 Mar.), a land bill in the interests of his relation Anthony Cooke (16 Mar.), casks (24 Mar.), reducing disloyal subjects to their true obedience (4 Apr.) and town planning in London and Westminster (6 Apr.).
Mr. Francis Bacon ... made a motion against enclosures and depopulation of towns and houses of husbandry and tillage.
But after arbitration by Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, many of his debts were funded and redeemed, and he received £1,200 for his part in the prosecution of Essex.
Gray's Inn, London WC1R 5DX
Gray's Inn, London WC1R 5AT
2-10 Princeton StLondon WC1R 4BH
In the sixteenth century there were many more legal societies or Inns than the four Inns of Court we know today.
One of the most outstanding students at Gray’s in the Golden Age was certainly Francis Bacon.
Masters of the Bench
The responsibility for the organization and running of the Inn is divided between the Masters of the Bench (also known as 'Benchers') in Pension and the Under Treasurer, its Chief Executive.
You can find full details regarding the election procedure for Masters of the Bench in part 1, section 4 of the Inn’s rules.
The latest list of Masters of the Bench (December 2015) is listed in alphabetical order.
London's Inns of Court are oases of calm amid the hustle and bustle of the City's legal heartland.
Furthermore, students living away from London can get access to financial assistance to cover transport costs to visit the Inns, and money is also available to cover the cost of ‘qualifying sessions’, 12 of which must be attended before being ‘called to the Bar’ (though the final one can be the call ceremony itself).
The Inns of Court, in London, are the professional associations to one of which every English barrister (and those judges who were formerly barristers) must belong.
Each Inn of Court is a self contained precinct within London, where barristers train and traditionally practice, although growth in the profession caused many barristers' chambers to move outside the precincts of the Inns of Court in the late 20th century.
You must join one of the four Inns-Lincoln's Inn, Inner Temple, Middle Temple or Gray's Inn (all based in London)-before you commence the vocational stage of training.
Before you can be Called to the Bar, you must attend 12 qualifying sessions at your Inn, which consists of collegiate or educational activities (often combined with dinners) in the form of lectures, residential courses, moots or debates and which give you the opportunity to meet with practising barristers.
London WC2A 3TL
London WC1R 5ET
London EC4Y 7HL
London EC4Y 9AT
We are one of the four Inns of Court.
Garden Walks in the City of London : Gardens, Inns and Alleyways
A walk through London’s historic legal quarter, exploring glorious hidden gardens, distinguished and ancient buildings and hidden alleyways.
This was our choice of activity when I met my sister in London on Friday.
“Staple Inn was originally attached to Gray’s Inn, which is one of the four Inns of Court.
Statue of Francis Bacon (1912) and The Holker Library
All of the gardens visited are havens of peace and tranquility and are just steps from the busy City of London streets.
There is a statue of Francis Bacon outside the Holker Library and through another arch and in another part of the gardens is an armillary – a form of sundial.
In Lincoln’s Inn we were able to go in the Chapel where the windows show the crests of the Treasurers from 1680 to the present day.
The Treasurer is the head of the Inn and changes annually.
Just our kind of “Quiet London“.
The first references to the Inn’s existence date back to 1370, roughly coinciding with the amendment of a clause in the Magna Carta that introduced the phrase “due process of law”.
For example, in 1370, as a woman, I could not even have entered Gray’s Inn.
