Marshalsea

"Denmark's a prison..."       [Hamlet]
made famous by the English writer, was located on the south side of the river Thames in London, and served as a prison as early as the 14th century until it closed in 1849.
criminals found 'refuge' there: those waiting Court Martial for military crimes; those who had committed 'unnatural' crimes; those intellectuals who had committed sedition against
the State; and, the many debtors to be found in London.
For paying prisoners, the Marshalsea provided access to a shop, a restaurant and a bar and also 'granted' the privilege of being allowed outside its walls every day; for those
We have, in the spirit of the age of unenlightenment, created prisons of our own making.
They avoid the syndrome of 'blaming the victim' at all costs-- some of them even care about prison reform [but we won't go there, at least not in this Blog].
Hamlet must have started it all...with his comment[above] that Denmark is a prison, way back when.
No matter.For Marshalsea has become a state of mind, a sanctuary where one can hide from the truths that we don't want to face; or, conversely, a prison thought-maze of our own making; or, worse still, a bully pulpit where we manufacture the intellectual, social and moral weapons to attack other un-like-minded people.
Safe from inside our prison walls.
In prisons of our own making.....
The poet assures us that —"Stone walls do not a prison make,"but a combination of the stone wall, the political parasite and the moral instructor is no garden of sweets.
A thriller set in Georgian London, it tells the story of loveable rogue Thomas Hawkins, would-be pastor turned ladies’ man and gambler, whose fall from grace ends abruptly in Southwark’s notorious debtor’s prison, the Marshalsea.
Fear and superstition are rife in the prison after the recent murder of one of its inmates, and Tom must use his wits, and every shred of his gambler’s luck, to discover the identity of the killer and earn his freedom.
Antonia Hodgson brings the sights and smells of 1727 Southwark to life, taking us deep inside the grim confines of the Marshalsea – a truly horrific, and fascinating, place.
The Marshalsea (1373- 1842) was one of Southwark’s notorious debtor’s prisons.
It existed in two locations on what is now Borough High Street, and was known for subjecting its prisoners to starvation and torture.
‘Although conditions in all the Southwark prisons were bad there are indications that they were worse in the Marshalsea, perhaps because the prisoners were entirely at the mercy of the Knight Marshal or his deputy.
The complaint of a Frenchman, M. La Touche, in 1629, that he was detained in “hunger and nakedness” because he could not pay the prison charges, although an order had been issued for his release, is typical of many.
In 1639 the prisoners revolted, pulled down the palings about the house and attacked the watch with stones, brickbats, and firebrands.
He left school and worked in a blacking warehouse to help his family, who had joined his father in the prison.
Southwark Council’s John Harvard Library and Local Studies Library now stand on the original site, at 211 Borough High Street.
The prison’s southern wall remains.
Georgian London was a truly scary place.
It was also an interesting one, and if you want to have a closer look at it, check out this amazing digital map of 1746 London at Locating London.org.
Search for ‘Marshalsea’ in the quick search box and you will see Tom Hawkins’s London- the Marshalsea, Snows Fields, the Borough, and much more.
If you’re still with me, you’re a nerd you might also like this prize winning animation by Pudding Lane Productions which flies through the streets of 17th century London.
Yes, it’s London as it was a hundred years or so before our story begins, but it’s still an interesting watch and brings to mind the twisting alleys, dark corners and firelit inns of Thomas Hawkins’s world.
Prison, London, United Kingdom
Marshalsea, a prison formerly existing in Southwark, London, on the south bank of the Thames and attached to the court of that name held by the steward and marshal of the English (later British) king.
It was consolidated in 1842 with the Queen’s Bench and Fleet prisons and was then described as a “prison for debtors and for persons charged with contempt of Her Majesty’s courts of the Marshalsea, the court of the queen’s palace of Westminster, and the high court of admiralty, also for admiralty prisoners under sentence of courts martial.”
The Marshalsea prison was abolished in 1849.
The prison is described in Charles Dickens’ novel Little Dorrit.
4   Officials releasing last two characters from prison (8)
MARSHALSEA (reference MARSHALSEA prison situated on the south bank of the River Thames in Southwark, now part of London.
From the 14th century until it closed in 1842, it housed men under court martial for crimes at sea, including those accused of "unnatural crimes", political figures and intellectuals accused of sedition – and most famously London’s debtors.
Charles Dickens’ father was imprisoned as a debtor in MARSHALSEA and Little Dorrit has a number of scenes set in the prison) excluding (releasing) EA the last two characters
This is shown in his portraits of all pieces of such system: the lawyer, the clerk, the judge, the prison authorities and the convicts.
In treating the theme of the Victorian system of punishment, Dickens shows his position against prisons, transportation and death penalty.
The prison system in England may have had a significant effect on the life and writing of Charles Dickens due to his father’s imprisonment in Marshalsea Debtors’ Prison as a consequence of his debts.
These kinds of prisons came to be workhouses for people
In case debtors had family, it must accompany them in prison.
London was one of the greatest cities in the world in the 19th C.
All kinds of prisoners were kept together with no separation of men and women, the young and the old, or the sane and the insane.
The poor conditions of the Victorian prisons are described in detail by Dickens in Great Expectations.
Looking with horror, Pip offers us a portrait of the inside of the prison and criticism on capital punishment:
This was horrible, and gave me a sickening idea of London” (164)
Many prisoners were convicted because of little thefts such as stealing pocket-handkerchiefs, watches, and jewellery, and the forgery of banknotes.
The hulks, the name that received the ships that transported convicts to the penal colony Australia, were used as floating prisons.
As ‘Convicts to Australia’ reports, “Convicts were housed below decks on the prison deck and often further
His office is located in Little Britain, the street where lawyers had their offices, near the Old Bailey (criminal courts) and Newgate prison.
That is, the Old Town of London: the world of criminality.
This description has contact with reality, as there was a room in Newgate prison where there were many busts of executed prisoners, in which stuck out the mark that the rope had
The comparison between Smithfield and Newgate is established when Pip is conducted inside the prison and imagines that convicts are going to be executed in the same way as animals are
I had a day in London with some friends yesterday and as is my want decided to go and check out the remains of The Marshalsea debtors prison.
The Marshalsea stood on the south bank of Thames in Southwark for a good three hundred years or so.
It was built to house men who had been court marshalled for crimes at sea.
There would politicals  and intellectuals accused of sedition and London’s debtors.
Unfortunately a small debt could land you in the prison for decades as it was the creditors who decided your fate.
But it was John Dickens, Charles Dickens father who was sent there in 1824 for a debt to a baker which forced to leave school at the age of 12 for a hideous blacking job in a factory and here are the remains of the prison.
The Marshalsea Prison, just off Borough High Street, in Southwark had its roots in the C14th, it was first mentioned in 1373.
Most prisons at that time were privately run.
It was a brutal and cruel place where men served sentences for debt, sedition, crimes at sea and other crimes.
Prisoners, if fortunate, were able to work to pay off their debts or their prison fees.
Small debts put them in the Marshalsea but they grew with their time in there, forcing prisoners to suffer longer and longer sentences.
The philanthropist, General Oglethorpe raised a fund to pay off the debts of as many debtors as possible and this in turn led to the founding of Georgia, in the US as a colony.
Georgia was used to resettle debtors and offenders.
The Marshalsea debtor's prison (in what is now London) is the main prison location in Little Dorrit, but where is located the first prison mentioned in the book?
Also in London
Pain and Degradation in Georgian London: Life in Marshalsea Prison
The first public buildings to be restored after the Great Fire of London were not churches, but prisons.
In particular, imprisonment for debt threatened the wellbeing and lives of all below the richest.
Of all the London prisons the Marshalsea, an ancient gaol in Southwark, was most feared by London’s poorest debtors – by the 1720s it was a place of starvation, torture, brutal oppression and murder.
Jerry White situates the Marshalsea in a nexus of power, oppression and legalised terrorism, and looks at some of the ways that prisoners fought back.
Jerry White is the author of London in the Twentieth Century: a City and Its People, winner of the Wolfson History Prize for 2001, and London in the Nineteenth Century: ‘A Human Awful Wonder of God’ (Jonathan Cape, 2007).
A longstanding friend of Raphael Samuel’s, and former editor of History Workshop Journal, Jerry White is Visiting Professor of London History at Birkbeck College.
This event is organised by the Raphael Samuel History Centre (University of East London, Birkbeck College and Bishopsgate Institute).
London
Pain and Degradation in Georgian London: Life in the Marshalsea Prison
Jerry White is a former editor of History Workshop Journal, and Visiting Professor of London History at Birkbeck.
His latest book, London in the Nineteenth Century: a Human Awful Wonder of God, was published by Jonathan Cape in 2007.
He is currently working on a history of London in the eighteenth century.
The Marshalsea Prison in Southwark was London’s most important prison for poor debtors in the eighteenth century.
In 1729 it came under parliamentary scrutiny by James Oglethorpe’s Gaols Committee which revealed a scandalous abuse of power involving the deliberate starvation of prisoners, torture, even murder.
The prison’s deputy keeper, William Acton, stood trial on four charges of murder but was acquitted on each; there seems to have been political manipulation at the highest level to ensure that no charge was proven against Acton or any of the other gaolers prosecuted as a result of the Gaols Committee’s endeavours.
We are afforded an intimate glimpse of life in Acton’s Marshalsea through the diary of John Baptist Grano, a musician imprisoned there for debt at the time of Oglethorpe’s inquiry.
Grano shows us the reality of two prisons subsisting in one establishment: the ‘master’s side’ for those who could pay Acton for their keep and the dreadful ‘common side’ where prisoners were deprived of all charitable assistance until they were helped by their friends or until they starved to death.
As we all know one of our historic relics is the original wall of Marshalsea prison - featured in Dickens' Little Dorrit.
OK - original brickwork is still in there but such is the degree of "refurbishment" currently being carried out (by Southwark Borough Council?)
Records of the Marshalsea Prison from 1773-1861 relating to the imprisonment of debtors and Admiralty prisoners.
Publication note:   In 1824 Charles Dickens' father was imprisoned in the Marshalsea, and in 1857 the prison was used as the setting for Little Dorrit.
By the late eighteenth century the prison of the Marshalsea lay on a site adjoining the King's Bench Prison in Borough High Street, Southwark.
The prison was originally a branch of the Court of the Verge and Marshal, the disciplinary department of the medieval royal household (not to be confused with the Marshal of the King's Bench who had responsibility for prisoners in the King's Bench prison).
In later periods it was a major debtors' prison and also held Admiralty prisoners: smugglers, those charged with excise offences, and sailors who had been court-martialled.
It was abolished under the Queen's Prison Act 1842, and prisoners were transferred to the Queen's Prison.
Thank goodness we no longer throw people in prison if they are in debt.
Behind these gates was where the notorious Marshalsea prison stood between 1373 - 1842.
One of the more well known prisoners was none other than Charles Dickens.
Lucky prisons aren't ruled by profit anymore.
What will be be saying about the new prisons in 500 yrs I wonder.
Southwark Prisons
Survey of London: Volume 25, St George's Fields (The Parishes of St. George the Martyr Southwark and St. Mary Newington).
Originally published by London County Council, London, 1955.
'Southwark Prisons', in Survey of London: Volume 25, St George's Fields (The Parishes of St. George the Martyr Southwark and St. Mary Newington), ed.
Ida Darlington (London, 1955), pp. 9-21.
In the 17th and 18th centuries there were four prisons in the small space between Newcomen Street and St. George's Church on the east side of Borough High Street, the King's Bench and the Marshalsea, both dating back to the 14th century and perhaps earlier, the County Gaol, dating from the beginning of the 16th century, and the House of Correction.
In addition there were two other prisons in the immediate neighbourhood, the Borough Compter, kept first on the island site in Borough High Street, where the old parish church of St. Margaret had stood, and subsequently moved to Tooley Street, and the Clink Prison belonging to the Bishop of Winchester.
The evil and cruelty revealed in 18th century descriptions of these prisons are appalling, and there is little reason to think from the records that have come down to us that conditions at earlier periods were any better, though probably there was less congestion.
n1) In terms of sheer human misery it is doubtful if even the horrors of the concentration camps of recent years were worse than the long, slow agony of close confinement, starvation, sickness, and torture which went on for centuries in the Marshalsea and King's Bench prisons.
Under the Norman kings, when the King's Court in both its general and its judicial character was itinerant, prisoners arraigned before it were detained in any convenient place near the court.
During the course of the 13th century the court of King's Bench was, in practice if not in theory, separated from the King's person, offences committed within the verge of the royal court being tried in what later became the Marshalsea Court by the King's Knight Marshal, but several centuries elapsed before the prisons which served the two courts were finally differentiated from each other or settled in one place.
21) onward, but throughout the mediaeval period it was often used indiscriminately for the prison of the Knight Marshal and for the prison kept by the Marshal of the Court of King's Bench, e.g., in 1324 there is a reference to John de Castello, a rebel, who was in the prison of the Marshalsea at York; (fn.
21) and in 1339 John Gerard, "chaplain," was pardoned for robberies and for escaping from the Marshalsea prison of the King's Bench at Canterbury.
21) There are several references on the Close and Patent Rolls to a royal prison in Southwark in the 13th century, but no indication that there was a definite house allocated for the purpose until 1373, when "the good men of the town of Suthwerk" were given a licence "to build in the high street leading from the church of St. Margaret towards the south, a house, 40 feet long and 30 feet wide, in which to hold the pleas of the Marshalsea of the king's household and to keep the prisoners of the Marshalsea while in the said town, and to hold all other the king's courts."
Plan of Borough High Street showing sites of prisons
From this time onward there seem to have been two prisons in Southwark, one for the Court of Marshalsea and one for the Court of King's Bench.
In 1384 Thomas atte Raven was pardoned for razing the houses and tenements of Richard Imworth, keeper of the Marshalsea of the King's Bench, in Southwark and for releasing the prisoners from the prisons of the King's Bench and Marshalsea there.
21) In 1393 there is an entry on the Patent Rolls concerning a felon, John Flemmyng, who escaped from the King's Bench prison in Southwark.
The chroniclers relate that Henry V, when Prince of Wales, was imprisoned in the King's Bench for striking or insulting Judge Gascoigne on the bench, (fn.
22) and that Jack Cade, during his short-lived occupation of Southwark, freed the prisoners of both prisons.
25) were imprisoned in the King's Bench, but the earliest list of prisoners that has been found, compiled in 1561, (fn.
26) includes 13 debtors, 3 recusants, 1 priest, and 2 persons accused of "inconjuracion" out of a total of 71, the remainder of whom were charged with felonies or misdemeanours.
The debtors in the King's Bench petitioned the King in 1624 against imprisonment for debt, saying that it was against the fundamental laws and well-being of the state, and that 80 had died of starvation in that prison during the year, and asking that if the whole estate of a debtor had been seized by his creditors he might be freed from confinement.
In 1653, Sir John Lenthall, then Marshal, in obedience to an order of the Council of State, sent in a list of the 393 prisoners in his charge.
28) Of these, 2 were on a plea of murder, 10 of trespass, and 2 by the "command of the Court"; most of the rest were detained for debt; several had been in prison for over 20 years.
Seventeen of the prisoners were women.
In 1576 a commission which included the Bishop of London and the Dean of St. Paul's, was appointed to relieve "poor prisoners confined for debt in the Queen's Bench."
29) providing for money to be collected by counties and corporate bodies throughout the kingdom for the relief of poor prisoners in the King's Bench and Marshalsea.
There were a number of private charities for the relief of prisoners, but it is doubtful if at any time more than a small proportion of the proceeds reached them.
In addition to the sufferings inflicted by the Marshal and his underlings, new prisoners were often fleeced by old-established inmates who tyrannized over their fellows.
32) which authorized the rebuilding of the prison.
For many years the prisoners were kept in two houses known as the Angel and the Crane, the former giving its name to Angel Place, which bounded it on the south (see the plan on p. 10).
By the middle of the 18th century the old King's Bench Prison had, in the words of the Act of 1754, become "unsafe for the custody, and dangerous to the health of the prisoners," and the sum of £7,800 was provided for a new building.
36) for the new prison, which was completed by 1758.
There were wild scenes outside the prison in 1768 when Wilkes was imprisoned there, and several civilians, including William Allen, the son of the host of the Horseshoe Inn in Blackman Street, were shot by the military.
40) An attempt to blow up the prison in 1792 failed.
Debtors imprisoned in the Bench were, on payment of a fee, allowed out on parole in an area known as the "Rules" of the King's Bench Prison (see the plan on Plate 24), much of which was, in the 18th century, open ground in St. George's Fields.
41) that "Many prisoners, whose actions are supersedable … occupy rooms, keep shops, enjoy places of profit, or live on the rent of their rooms a life of idleness; and being indulged with the use of the key, go out when they please, and thereby convert a prison … into an alms-house for their support."
42) the prison so crowded that "many lay in the Chapel"; with women and children, there were 1,399 on the lists of whom more than two-thirds slept inside and one-third in the Rules.
43) an enthusiastic account of the King's Bench describing its amenities, the fives courts, reading rooms, public kitchen, bakehouse, etc., and the state house, "A good and substantial brick building, containing eight spacious and excellent apartments, let at one shilling per week, to the oldest prisoners, or those who, by their good conduct and gentlemanly behaviour, have entitled themselves to this indulgence."
Charles Dickens' memories of his father's confinement in the Marshalsea prison were recalled in David Copperfield in the adventures of the volatile Mr. Micawber, but the scene was transferred to the King's Bench.
44) and the Queen's Bench, renamed the Queen's Prison, became the sole prison for debtors and bankrupts.
All fees were abolished, but so were most of the privileges which the prisoners had previously enjoyed.
Imprisonment for debt was finally abolished in 1869 (fn.
The early history of the Marshalsea prison is inextricably mixed with that of the King's Bench.
As has already been shown (p. 9), the Marshal often kept prisoners in Southwark in the 13th century and had a permanent building there in the 14th century.
The Court and Prison were at first used only for offences committed within the verge of the King's Court, but from 1430 onward there are references to the Admiralty Court in Southwark (fn.
n3) and to sailors imprisoned for piracy, etc. (fn.
26) The references to imprisonment in the Marshalsea for debt begin about the same time.
Edmund Bonner, Bishop of London, was imprisoned in the Marshalsea from 1550 to 1553 and again from 1560 until his death there in 1569.
23) A list of 34 prisoners there in 1561 (fn.
26) includes, in addition to Bonner, only 3 prisoners for religion, 1 for debt, 1 "for Ronnynge away from the Gallys," and several mariners sent in by the Lord Admiral "for Suspecyons of peracye."
27) but thereafter the majority of prisoners in the Marshalsea were debtors, though it continued to serve as a prison for the Court of Admiralty until its closure in 1842.
Although conditions in all the Southwark prisons were bad there are indications that they were worse in the Marshalsea, perhaps because the prisoners were entirely at the mercy of the Knight Marshal or his deputy.
The complaint of a Frenchman, M. La Touche, in 1629, that he was detained in "hunger and nakedness" because he could not pay the prison charges, although an order had been issued for his release, is typical of many.
27) In 1639 the prisoners revolted, pulled down the palings about the house and attacked the watch with stones, brickbats, and firebrands.
49) The prisoners were tortured with irons, beating, and by being locked up with human carcases.
They were confined in so small a space that many were stifled to death in the heat of summer, and those who survived ill-treatment often died of starvation, since the keepers took most of what was given in charity.
Some slight improvements were made as a result of the inquiry but the root cause of the trouble was not removed, the prison continued to be run for private profit.
21) sold the property to George Tucker under the description of "All that great Messuage called the Marshalsey used for the prison of His Maties Houshold now in the Tenure … of Sr Edward Varney" together with a number of tenements, 9 of them in Mermaid Yard, and a garden.
50) Thirty-three years later, when the premises were leased by Tucker's successor, Eleanor Rowe, to John Lowman, they consisted of some newly-erected brick buildings with a yard in front and a garden lying on the east side of the yard, and an old building called the lodge on the south side of the yard, and a number of small houses which were not considered to be part of the prison (fn.
Lowman built a new court house which continued in use until the removal of the prison.
Lowman's nephew, who was keeper early in the 18th century, specialized in thumb screws, iron hoods, and other forms of torture to extract the last halfpenny out of his unfortunate captives (fn.
As late as 1811 a prisoner is reported as dying of want.
38) In 1729 there were 401 prisoners in the Marshalsea of whom 82 were housed on the Master's side.
Of the other rooms,—Five are let to a man who is not a prisoner … Four rooms, the Oaks, are for women … There are above forty rooms for men on the Master's-side, in which are about sixty beds; yet many prisoners have no … place to sleep in but the chapel, and the tap-room."
42) Prisoners on the Master's side had the use of rackets courts and of a little back court for skittles, though there can have been little room for them within the narrow confines of the prison.
From 1666 to 1724, when the White Lion had become ruinous, the sheriff's prisoners were lodged in the Marshalsea (fn.
53) and became an additional source of profit to the Keeper, but by 1799, when Horsemonger Lane Gaol was opened, the Marshalsea buildings had in their turn become too bad for further use and the County Gaol was purchased and altered to serve as a prison for the Marshal and the Admiralty.
The old site was sold to Samuel Davis, cooper, in 1802, but the prisoners were not removed until 1811.
Theories were rife that this was part of the old Marshalsea and perhaps of the court-house there, but as the engraving reproduced on Plate 5a shows, the court-house formed a projection on the south front of the north side of the court-yard of the prison at some distance from the wall in question, and accounts of the prison buildings in 1800–11 describe them as so dilapidated and ruinous that it is difficult to believe that anything so substantial as this arch could have formed part of them.
The evidence available suggests that the wall and arch formed part of the cooper's workshop built by Samuel Davis circa 1812, who perhaps used some of the bricks from the old prison for the purpose.
There is very little information available about the work of the Surrey Quarter Sessions or Justices in the mediaeval period and no evidence has been found that there was a County Gaol in Southwark prior to 1513, when a commission of gaol delivery was issued for "Surrey Gaol, Southwark."
27) In 1557 a pardon was granted to John Harper, who had been attainted of high treason and ordered by the sheriff to be taken to Southwark gaol and thence to the gallows of St. Thomas a Waterings to be hung, drawn, and quartered.
27) Stow, in 1598, speaks of "the white Lyon a Gaole so called, for that the same was a common hosterie for the receit of travellers … This house was first used as a Gaole within these fortie yeares last, since the which time the prisoners were once removed thence to a house in Newtowne, where they remained for a short time, and were returned backe again to the foresaid White Lyon, there to remaine as in the appointed Gaole for the Countie of Surrey."
Neither the White Lion nor the County Gaol are marked on the map of Southwark circa 1542, the lower part of which is reproduced on Plate 1, but in a sale of 1535 the White Lion is described as a great tenement or inn with a tenement and a shop on either side and a barn, stables, etc., in the tenure of Robert Faireman, barber, and an acre of pasture ground lying in common in St. George's Field.
During the reign of Elizabeth 1 recusants swelled the numbers of prisoners, (fn.
27) but it seems that the supply of prisoners, and with it the profits of the Keeper, fell off during the early Stuart period, for in 1635 Robert Bellin, the then Keeper, petitioned the Court of High Commission at Lambeth for leave to attend at Court so that "as occasion should serve he might have now and then prisoners committed thither," a petition which was granted.
In 1638 George Coks, a Benedictine monk, who was imprisoned there, complained that he was in danger of his life by reason of the closeness of the prison (fn.
27) and asked to be removed to the Clink, a prison which was by no means salubrious.
7) for the transfer of the Clink prison for the purpose.
In the White Lion the debtors had a buttery, four chambers, and "two great Chambers" which were in need of repairs to the roof, a parlour "lockt upp by Arthur," and a very small chapel "beinge a throughfaire to the buttery but otherwise conveniently scituate for the severall Prisoners to come to and the Criminal Prisoners to come to the window to heare."
For several years Arthur was paid £50 a year to keep the House of Correction, but he failed to carry out repairs or even to pay for the bread supplied to prisoners and was accused of being a "Receptor, hospitator et comfortator" of robbers and other evil-disposed persons.
60) By 1666 the White Lion, or such part of it as was still available for use as a prison, was in such a bad condition that the sheriff was obliged to commit his prisoners to the Marshalsea.
In November, 1725, the Court, of Sessions ordered that an old building standing on "County Land between the new Gaol and the publick Street" and formerly in the possession of Captain Bateman, coachmaker, part of which extended over the gateway to the gaol, should be pulled down and the old timbers used to make a fence in the yard next to the lodge with "a large Window Frame in the Wall for the prisoners to begg through (if hereafter it shall be thought fit)."
9) Two years later, largely owing to the work of John Howard, an Act was passed "for preserving the health of prisoners in gaol, and preventing the gaol distemper."
63) They ordered, among other things, that some windows should be made in the wards of the County Gaol, 2 rooms should be set aside as sick rooms and "three Dozen of Canvass Frocks of the cheapest Sort" should be provided for the use of prisoners.
During the 18th century the majority of prisoners in the County Gaol were felons though there was still a small percentage of debtors.
64) as were some of the rioters concerned in the destruction of property in Southwark during the Gordon Riots in 1780.
and converted into a prison for the Marshalsea.
On the other hand, he found that the prisoners suffered much from cold and hunger, since they were allowed only a 1½d. loaf a day and received no charities, and, apart from a little desultory beating of hemp, they had nothing to do.
The prison, which was designed by George Gwilt the elder, consisted of a quadrangle of three storeys, three sides being used for criminals and the fourth for debtors (see p. 106).
Provision was made for over 400 prisoners.
Some alterations to the prison were carried out by John Willson, builder, of Great Suffolk Street in 1856.
We enter the gateway of the flatroofed building at the entrance of the prison, on one side of which is the governor's office, and an apartment occupied by the gatewarder, and on the other is a staircase leading up to a gloomy chamber, containing the scaffold on which many a wretched criminal has been consigned to public execution.
Emerging from the gateway, the governor's house, a three-storied building, stands right in front of us, on the other side of the courtyard, having a wing of the debtors' prison on each side, all of them built of brick … The right wing of the prison contains sheriffs' debtors, who maintain themselves … the left wing is set apart for county court debtors and those sheriffs' debtors who are unable to do so …
The court yard is flanked on the left hand by the infirmary, a detached building, containing wards for debtors and criminals … on the right by the sessions' house, the front of which faces Newington Causeway.
The prison was closed in August, 1878, under the provisions of the Prisons Act, 1877, which transferred the responsibility for all prisons to the Prison Commissioners.
74) For some years the gatehouse of the gaol was used by the London County Council as a weights and measures office, but a new building for that purpose, designed by T. Blashill, was erected on part of the prison site in 1892 when the remainder of the prison buildings were demolished.
The Sessions House was built on the north-west side of the prison with an approach road from Newington Causeway.
It was completed and opened as the Sessions House for the County of London on 11th January, 1921.
Capter I of English Prisons Under Local Government, by S. & B. Webb, gives an excellent brief survey of prison conditions in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries.
The House of Lords, in 1701, refused to pass a Bill for "regulating" the overcrowded King's Bench and Fleet Prisons, expressly on the ground that if the number of prisoners was reduced "the Profits thereby accruing will not be a proportionable Recompence to the Officers to attend the Courts; so that the King's Four Courts at Westminster will be without Prisons, and without Officers to assist them."
Entries in the prison register show that John Dickens was imprisoned there from Febrauary to May, 1824, for a debt of £10.
Samuel Davis bought only the part of the prison near Borough High Street which was built on land owned by the Crown.
The ground on which the back part of the Marshalsea stood was owned by the Gosling family and leased to the Deputy Marshal of the prison.
The Gosling property, which adjoined Tennis Court, was acquired by the London County Council between 1950 and 1951, and this together with other land running parallel with Borough High Street and extending from Newcomen Street down to Long Lane, has been used for the extension of the Tabard Garden Housing Estate.
An inquisition of 1650 quoted in the course of this transaction contains the first definite mention of a House of Correction in Southwark, but it had probably been in existence for some years.
L.C.C. Survey of London, Vol.
Camden Society, Chronicle of the Grey Friars of London, ed.
R. and J. Dodsley, London and its Environs Described, 1761, Vol.
The Morning Chronicle and London Advertiser, 9th June, 1780.
W. Smith, State of the Gaols in London …, 1776.
J. Stow, Survey of London, 1598.
of St. Saviour's, Southwark.
London Mag., August, 1780.
H. Mayhew and J. Binney, The Criminal Prisons of London, 1862.
South London Press, 12th March, 1892.
Little Dorrit: Amy Dorrit’s father is not very good with money.
She was born in the Marshalsea debtors’ prison and... http://dlvr.it/r9cjJ
